Title: Revisiting data-driven dynamic security assessment with a tabular foundation model

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.16031v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Jul 2026 01:03:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 1

# Revisiting data-driven dynamic security assessment with a tabular foundation model 

Olayiwola Arowolo, Maosheng Yang, Jochen Cremer, Electrical and Sustainable Energy, TU Delft 

Abstract —Data-driven pre-fault dynamic security assessment (DSA) rapidly evaluates the dynamic risk of credible contin-gencies on a power system using machine learning. Existing approaches face two limitations. First, they require a large labelled database for training, with a separate model trained, tuned, and maintained for each contingency in a potentially long list of credible contingencies. Second, the trained models generalize poorly to unseen contingencies. This work addresses the limitations by using a tabular foundation model (TFM) that assesses stability through in-context learning, requiring no retraining or hyperparameter optimization. A single TFM can assess many contingencies at once, removing the need for one model per classifier. We also characterize when the use of electrical distance coordinates (EDC) as continuous features enables generalization of TFM to unseen contingencies and when they do not, demonstrating how a few labelled samples can reliably improve generalization. Through comprehensive case studies on the IEEE 68-bus system, we show that a single TFM attains an average Macro F1 score of about 90% with only 120 labelled samples per contingency, roughly two orders of magnitude fewer than conventionally assumed, without any model retraining or hyperparameter tuning. For new/unseen contingencies, we show that using just 10 labelled samples of the new contingency with EDC encoding matches the best achievable transfer learning oracle model, which requires fully labelled data and is not deployable in practice. Overall, this initial study paves the way towards developing and deploying foundation models for power system operations, with possible applications across multiple operational tasks. 

Index Terms —Dynamic security assessment, machine learning, tabular foundation model, electrical distance coordinate, gener-alization. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE increasing penetration of renewable energy increases variability and uncertainty in power grid operations [1]. Despite these changes, the power grid must remain reliable and secure, as equipment failures can lead to cascading outages with disastrous consequences [2]. Operators have to balance pushing the power system near its limit for economic efficiency and maintaining secure operations [3]. Dynamic security assessment, which involves evaluating the ability of the power system to withstand a sudden contingency, enables the power system to be operated less conservatively, without sacrificing system security [1]. Dynamic security assessment involves solving differential-algebraic equations at small time steps to create time-domain simulations (TDS). These simulations can be computationally intensive, especially for large grids. Thus, the use of TDS to assess system stability has typically been limited to preventive screening, as simulations are too time-consuming for online use [4]. The work in [5] introduced a data-driven approach for online DSA. The approach is based on training a ma-chine learning (ML) classifier model with historical or TDS-generated data during an offline phase. Once trained, the model can be used to rapidly assess the system’s stability during an online phase [6]. Classic ML techniques such as decision trees [7] and support vector machines (SVM) [8] are commonly used in the literature because of their fast assessment and good interpretability [9]. We refer the reader to [4] for a comprehensive overview of classic ML methods employed in DSA. The advent of deep learning has seen the application of deep neural networks (DNNs) to online DSA. DNNs can extract features directly from PMU data streams to predict a stability label or the system’s response trajectory [10], [11]. The use of DNNs for DSA has led to two classes of data-driven DSA approaches, namely, pre-fault DSA and post-fault DSA. Pre-fault DSA uses steady-state operating conditions (OCs) as features (voltages, power demands, etc.), which can be collected before any fault occurs. On the other hand, post-fault DSA uses time series trajectory measurements from PMUs, sampled before, during or immediately after fault clearing to predict the system’s response [12], [13]. The goal of pre-fault DSA is to assess as many contingencies as possible before they occur, and it is usually run minutes to hours in advance to enable preventive control actions by operators [14]. On the other hand, post-fault DSA aims to activate automatic emergency controls [13]. This paper focuses on pre-fault DSA. Fig. 1 shows the typical workflow for an ML-based pre-fault DSA approach. A training database is constructed by running TDS for a distribution of realistic OCs. A classifier is trained for each fault in the list of credible contingencies [15]. It is assumed that the most severe contingencies are included in the contingency list, so that the DSA approach works for known contingencies. However, for unforeseen contingencies outside the expected contingency list, the classifier may have poor accuracy. While this approach is currently preferred by operators [16], there may be unexpected contingencies which compromise the accuracy of the DSA system. Also, there can be a significant number of credible contingencies in a large power system, which makes the process of training and updating hundreds or thousands of individual classifiers cumbersome [15]. There have been approaches to improve generalization to new/unforeseen contingencies in the literature. The work in [17] proposed a transfer learning approach for adapting to a new but related contingency, while the same authors proposed the use of multi-label learning for training a classifier for many faults with missing/incomplete labels [18]. These approaches arXiv:2607.16031v1 [cs.LG] 17 Jul 2026 JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 2TDS   

> Corrective
> action
> Operator
> decision
> Train ML
> Classifier
> Historical
> OCs
> Training
> database
> Classifier
> New OC Stability Label
> OFFLINE
> PHASE
> ONLINE
> PHASE
> Fig. 1: Conventional data-driven pre-fault DSA workflow. In the offline phase, a classifier is trained for every contingency to be assessed during the online phase.

do not extend to completely different or unrelated contingen-cies. The authors of [14] proposed representing contingency locations with an electrical distance-based coordinates (EDC) for better generalization. However, while contingencies at similar locations usually have similar DSA labels, pre-fault information alone is insufficient for characterizing the dynamic behaviour of the system. Other approaches for handling new contingencies include online learning [19], whereby the classi-fier is retrained periodically or whenever the accuracy or some other metric falls below a specified threshold [3]. Despite these innovations, the generalization of pre-fault DSA models to unforeseen contingencies which are not part of the training database or changing topologies remains challenging [20]. Consequently, ineffective generalization to changing system topologies is one of the key challenges hindering the practical adoption of ML-based DSA systems. [4]. Without effective generalization, the combinatorial explo-sion of sampling every feasible OC and topology combination makes it impractical to generate exhaustive data [20]. There-fore, the computational budget for generating labels via TDS is a limiting constraint for data-driven pre-fault DSA. Since ML classifiers require fairly balanced classes, and insecure operating conditions occur only rarely under naive Monte Carlo sampling, a large number of simulations must be run to obtain a sufficient number of insecure cases, to characterize the decision boundary. This leads to a very inefficient use of the limited computational budget for TDS. Hence, a key question is: how can the limited computational budget be best spent? There have been approaches to smarter data generation for pre-fault DSA databases, including importance sampling [21], ex-ploring stability boundaries [22], and diversity sampling [23]. However, these approaches may also incur high computational cost due to optimization steps required to reduce the search space. To reduce the computational burden of generating labelled datasets for multiple contingencies under pre-fault DSA, it is desirable to require minimal labelled data for each contingency considered and to generalize to unseen contingencies. This motivates the development of approaches that are sample-efficient, generalize across systems or faults, and remain robust to class imbalance. To this end, foundation models are promising. Foundation models (FM) are models trained on large-scale, heterogeneous datasets and can be fine-tuned for different applications using small datasets. The idea of a foundation model for power systems has been proposed in [24], with initial use cases which focus on steady-state operations. [25] uses a foundation model to predict power system response trajectories, under the scope of post-fault DSA. However, the use of foundation models for pre-fault DSA remains unexplored. In this work, we present a new approach for pre-fault DSA based on a tabular foundation model (TFM). The model works on small data samples, requiring no training or fine-tuning step. Despite its sample efficiency, a TFM-based classifier may still struggle to reliably generalize to an unseen contingency without additional labelled data. To improve generalization to unseen contingencies when a few labelled data are available, we modify EDC (mod-EDC) to capture post-fault topology. The main contributions of this work are as follows:  

> •

For the first time, we explore the use of a TFM for pre-fault DSA. We demonstrate how the TFM enables accu-rate DSA prediction with a substantially smaller training database than is currently assumed, without retraining or hyperparameter optimization.  

> •

We propose a multi-contingency DSA workflow using a single TFM, which removes the need to train one classifier for each contingency, while outperforming a state-of-the-art multi-label DSA baseline.  

> •

We characterize how EDC enables the TFM to generalize to unseen contingencies and when it fails. We further show how a simple modification of EDC (mod-EDC) improves generalization when a few labelled samples of the previously unseen contingency are available. The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section II formulates the pre-fault DSA problem. Section III presents the proposed workflow. In Section IV, we perform case studies to evaluate the proposed approach. Section V discusses the results and notes some limitations, while Section VI concludes the paper and discusses future directions. II. D ATA -DRIVEN PRE -FAULT DSA 

A. Problem statement 

Power system dynamics can be described by a set of differential-algebraic equations (DAEs): 

(

˙x = f (x, g, a ),

0 = h(x, g, a ), (1) where x ∈ RN are the dynamic state variables, g ∈ RM are the algebraic states and a are control states. Here, f (·) is a function which describes the evolution of the system states, while h(·) are the algebraic network constraints which the system must satisfy. Under changing generation and loading conditions, the system must be able to withstand a sudden contingency, such as a three-phase fault on a line. To determine the system’s dynamic response, the DAEs in Eq. 1 are solved through numerical integration at small time steps: 

xn+1 = xn +

Z tn+1 

> tn

f (x, g, a ) dt. (2) JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 3

This is known as a time-domain simulation (TDS). After the TDS, the stability of the system can be determined, for example, by the Transient Stability Index (TSI): 

TSI = 360 − | ∆δmax |

360 + |∆δmax | , (3) where |∆δmax | is the maximum power-angle difference be-tween any two generators after a fault. A system with TSI > 0

will be marked stable; otherwise, it is unstable. The stability label is denoted by Y . For a large system, x may include thousands of variables, making real-time solution of the DAE challenging. With data-driven pre-fault DSA, the TDS process described above is used to generate a training database. The database is used to train a classifier model, which uses pre-fault steady-state features X ∈ [P, Q, V, θ ] to predict an approximate label ˜Y :

˜F(X) → ˜Y , (4) where P, Q, V, θ are the active power injection, reactive power injection, voltage magnitude, and voltage angle, respec-tively. Eq. 4 gives the approximate labelling function ˜F, which is trained to minimize the distance ∥Y − ˜Y ∥p, where p is the distance norm. 

B. Operational challenges 

The previous section describes how the training database is generated via TDS and how an ML classifier is trained to predict security labels. The existing workflow has two issues:  

> •

Per scenario model proliferation: In the conventional DSA workflow, a separate classifier has to be trained for each contingency in the contingency list [17]. As the number of credible contingencies to consider increases, the number of models to train increases, with the atten-dant cost of hyperparameter tuning. Each model must also be retrained/updated with new OC data.  

> •

Inadequate generalization to unseen scenarios: When there is a new contingency, the current catalogue of classifiers cannot be used. First, labelled training data must be generated for the new contingency through TDS, and then a new classifier can be trained. A change in the original system topology also renders previously trained classifiers invalid. In practice, these two operational challenges are related and become increasingly costly when the list of credible contin-gencies is large, and there are limited resources for TDS even in the offline phase. The first issue motivates the need for a sample-efficient DSA model such that high accuracy can be attained even with relatively small labelled training data. The second issue motivates the need for a continuous representa-tion of contingencies, such that a single model may interpolate from a seen contingency to a new one without retraining. A tabular foundation model (TFM) fulfils the desired quality for a sample-efficient DSA model, while the use of EDC encoding in the TFM enables better generalization to unseen contingencies. OC 1

TFM 

> forward pass

1

OC 2

OC n

0

1

> Context ( labelled)

OC x ?

> Query ( unlabelled )
> P( 1|OC x, Context)
> Fig. 2: TFM prediction requires no parameter update or hyperparameter tuning

C. Generalization to unseen faults 

Let L be the true labelling function: 

L(X, Φ) → Y, (5) where Φ is a scenario vector that captures the network topol-ogy (admittance matrix) and the fault scenario (fault duration, location, post-fault topology, etc.). L is a deterministic func-tion of the pre-fault state X and the scenario Φ. The ML classifier ˜F learns a conditional approximation ˜F(X|Φ) ≃L(X, Φ) , where the scenario vector Φ is implicitly approxi-mated by the classifier. If Φ is fixed over a distribution D of X,

X is a sufficient statistic for approximating L given sufficient training samples. However, when the scenario changes such that Φ1̸ = Φ 0, the prediction error: |L (X, Φ1) − ˜FΦ0 (X)| is unbounded. Φ1 could be a new fault location, for example. Consequently, ˜F is a poor approximation of L in this scenario, because the model is extrapolating [20]. The ML classifier aims to learn a joint distribution P (Y |X) with a decision boundary which determines the probability of stable/unstable labels given a set of pre-fault conditions. When P (Y |X0)

for a source domain is ̸ = P (Y |X1) for a target domain, for X0 = X1, this is known as concept shift [26]. Concept shift changes the true labelling function L, which results in a change in the true decision boundary. Importantly, P (Y |X1) is theoretically not identifiable from P (Y |X0) without additional samples, {X1, Y }, from the target domain or further causal assumptions [27], [28]. The non-identifiability holds when the ML classifier observes only X and Φ is implicit. If Φ is made part of the observation through a continuous encoding, con-tingencies which were indistinguishable under concept shift become separable points in the new augmented input space. Generalizing to an unseen contingency becomes interpolation between points rather than extrapolation. In Section IV-E, we investigate how to represent Φ for good generalization performance. III. T ABULAR FOUNDATION MODEL FOR PRE -FAULT DSA 

A. Background: Tabular Foundation Model 

We adopt TabPFN [29] as the TFM in this work. Con-ventional classifiers fit their parameters to the training data through gradient descent. Whereas the TFM is a transformer pretrained once on 100 million synthetic datasets and can be applied to a new task or dataset without further retraining. JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 4C1 ,C 2 … Ck              

> Contingency list
> OC sampling
> TDS
> D1
> D2
> Dk
> Loc,
> Topology Encoder EDC 1…EDC k+1
> Single -contingency
> Context ←Dk
> Multi –contingency
> Context ←D1∪⋯∪
> Dk
> TFM
> Security label
> OC forecast
> Query
> Context construction
> OFFLINE PHASE ONLINE PHASE
> New contingency
> Ck+ 1
> Fig. 3: Workflow for the proposed approach. In the offline phase, data is generated via TDS. In the online phase, the TFM may be used to predict labels for individual or multiple contingencies. For unseen contingencies, EDC-based encoding may be provided as additional context for the TFM.

During inference, the TFM performs in-context learning (ICL). ICL is a learning framework whereby transformer models perform new tasks simply by processing new input-output pairs without requiring model retraining or any parameter updates [30]. For a TFM, given the labelled training data Dtr 

= {(Xi, Y i)}ni=1 , and the unlabelled queries, the TFM predicts the labels for all queries in a single forward pass as shown in Fig. 2. This is analogous to how large language models (LLMs) infer responses using the provided prompt as context. The training step in conventional classifiers reduces to caching the training data in memory, but no further parameter update or hyperparameter search is required. The TFM approximates the Bayesian posterior predictive distribution: 

P (Ytest |Xtest , X train , Y train )

. The prediction step is a Bayesian inference conditioned on the available training data. The TFM can achieve accurate predictions with a small n and requires only one pretrained model across different tasks. The proposed workflow exploits these two properties. 

B. Proposed workflow 

This section describes the proposed workflow for online pre-fault DSA using TFM as illustrated in Fig. 3. Our proposed approach is comprehensive and addresses challenges related to large database generation and generalization to unseen contingencies. The first step in the workflow is identifying a list of critical contingencies to assess in the online phase. For the selected contingencies, labelled training data must be generated via TDS. A wide range of OCs should be simulated to ensure maximum diversity in the dataset. We assume the training dataset is generated via Monte-Carlo sampling of OCs in this work, but other approaches which produce high-quality TDS-generated labels may be used as well. The labelled training database for each contingency serves as context for the TFM. In the online phase, each contingency in the list will be assessed for the forecast set of OCs. For each contingency, the context of the TFM is chosen to be the labelled training data for that contingency. For a large list of contingencies, the use of one TFM simplifies the process of training individual classifiers and reduces it to a one-step prediction via ICL. TFM may perform inference for each contingency sequentially or in parallel, depending on available memory resources. For a short list of critical contingencies, a multi-contingency DSA approach may be taken, where training data for each contingency can be part of a pooled context, and a prediction can be made for any contingency in the database. For a new/unseen contingency, the sample efficiency of the TFM can be exploited. The system operator has two options under a preventive DSA framework: a few labelled samples of the unseen contingency can be generated via TDS and added to the TFM context. Alternatively, where new data generation is impractical, the TFM may be used for zero-shot prediction of the new contingency. Here, we propose the use of the EDC-based encoding as additional input for each contingency so the TFM may learn structural relationships between known contingencies and the unseen ones. 

C. Electrical Distance Coordinate Encoding 

To enhance the generalization of a trained DSA classifier to unseen contingencies, we seek a scenario vector which represents the contingency characteristics, such as location or post-fault topology. It is desirable that the chosen represen-tation is continuous and embeds similar scenarios closer in the representational space than dissimilar ones. [14] proposed the electrical distance coordinate (EDC) to replace the discrete contingency index with a continuous contingency location in a metric space. For a pair of buses (i, j ), the electrical distance between them is given as: 

dij = zii + zjj − zij − zji (6) where zii and zjj are self-impedances, while zij and zji 

are mutual impedances. To ensure that Euclidean distances in the coordinate space align with electrical distances, a set of reference nodes, k, is selected that minimizes the distance residual: 

R = X

> i<j

(|| ci − cj || 2 − dij )2 (7) where ci = [ di,r 1...d i,rk ] is the coordinate of bus i, found using electrical distance from i to each of the reference nodes. We have used 8 reference nodes in our implementation. Metric learning is used to further minimize R. We select reference nodes using greedy forward selection. Each contingency’s scenario vector is the pre-fault electrical distance coordinate of the faulted bus; EDC k ∈ R8 for k ∈ { 1... 22 }. We note two points. First, the EDC for a new/unseen contingency is continuous relative to the training contingencies. Second, only the contingency location and Z-bus matrix of the original net-work are needed to compute EDC. Hence, two contingencies at the same bus which are cleared by tripping different lines would have identical EDC encoding. This limits the ability of a classifier using EDC encoding to distinguish these two faults. To this end, we propose the mod-EDC encoding, which takes the post-fault topology into account. We assume the clearing line for a contingency is known, and the clearing times are the same for all contingencies. Our approach is motivated by the classic equal area criterion (EAC) analysis JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 5                                   

> TABLE I: Hyperparameter search spaces for the baseline models. Model Hyperparameter Search space Sampling XGBoost
> n_estimators {100, 200, 400 }discrete
> max_depth {3, 4, 6, 8 }discrete
> learning_rate {0.03, 0.1, 0.3 }discrete
> subsample {0.7, 1.0 }discrete MLP
> hidden_layer_sizes {(64), (128), (128, 64), (256, 128) }
> discrete
> alpha [10 −5,10 −2]log-uniform
> learning_rate_init [10 −4,10 −2]log-uniform DT
> max_depth {3, 5, 8, 12, 20 }discrete
> min_samples_leaf {1, 2, 5, 10 }discrete
> criterion {gini, entropy }discrete SVM-RBF C[10 −2,10 3]log-uniform
> gamma [10 −4,10 0]log-uniform MDSA-S σ3, σ 4, σ 5{10 −5, . . . , 10 5}axis-sweep

for transient stability. In EAC analysis, the system’s response is determined by the accelerating area and the decelerating area. The accelerating area largely depends on fault location and clearing time. While the decelerating area depends on the synchronizing power of the network after the fault is cleared. Therefore, we use the post-fault topology to compute the differential coordinate: 

Qk = EDC pre k − EDC post k (8) 

Qk is a label-free proxy for how severely the clearing ac-tion changes the synchronizing power of the network. The modified-EDC encoding is given by: 

Mk = [ EDC pre k || Qk] ∈ R16 (9) 

D. Baselines 

We compare the proposed approach to baselines from the literature. The baseline models and the hyperparameter settings are shown in Tab. I. For discrete-valued hyperparameters, we searched randomly over the grid search space. For continuous-valued hyperparameters, we used log-uniform sampling over the search space: IV. C ASE STUDIES 

Based on the proposed workflow, we design case studies to answer 3 questions: 1) How sample efficient is the proposed approach com-pared to existing benchmarks using the standard one-classifier-per-contingency workflow? 2) How well does the proposed approach perform when a single model is used for assessing multiple contingen-cies? 3) When, and how well, does a continuous EDC-based encoding enable the TFM to generalize to unseen con-tingencies, and how much additional labelled data from the unseen contingency is needed for reliable general-ization? Positive answers to the above questions would position the proposed approach as a viable solution to the two identified 

> Fig. 4: The test system is the IEEE 68-bus network

challenges. After describing the test system and modelling assumptions, we evaluate the proposed approach by compar-ing its performance with four baselines at different training database sizes. Subsequently, we evaluate the robustness of the proposed approach to severe class imbalance and compare it with a state-of-the-art multi-label classification method. We continue by exploring the generalization of the proposed approach to unseen contingencies and finish by considering computational aspects of the proposed approach. 

A. Test system and Assumptions 

The IEEE 68-bus system shown in Fig. 4 was used as the test system. A set of 120,000 samples was generated for each of the 22 contingencies considered. The samples here describe the system under AC steady-state operation. The transient stability of the 22 contingencies was simulated in time domain for 10s. Each contingency corresponds to a 3-phase bus fault, and the fault is cleared after 0.1s by tripping a line, leading to an N-1 post-contingency network topology. The stability label is 1 if the system remains stable, that is, all phase angles remain within the specified limits; otherwise, the system is unstable, 0. The simulations are performed in MATLAB R2016b Simulink, using the same setting described in [31]. The list of the selected contingencies is given in Tab II. To create high variability in the OCs, we have used the same sampling procedure as in [32]. The active loads are sampled from a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.75 between all load pairs. Loads were converted to a marginal Kumaraswamy(1.6, 2.8) distribution by making use of the inverse transformation method, then scaled to be within ±50% of the nominal active loads. The reactive loads were scaled from their nominal values by assuming constant bus impedances. The total active power was uniformly distributed across all generators, then normalized with respect to their capacity-sharing ratio, with the reactive powers distributed in the same way. An optimiza-tion that minimizes the absolute deviations of the active and reactive power shares was solved for the AC network. The data generation process produces 22 datasets where the ratio JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 6                                                                                                

> TABLE II: Selected contingencies and label distribution Fault Faulted Clearing line Clearing line Stable ID Bus From To Proportion 123 23 22 0.90 223 24 23 0.89 322 23 22 0.85 462 63 62 0.96 562 65 62 0.99 625 25 54 0.30 725 26 25 0.30 858 58 57 0.93 958 59 58 0.93 10 29 29 28 0.09 11 29 29 26 0.10 12 54 55 54 0.90 13 54 54 53 0.52 14 54 25 54 0.50 15 17 43 17 0.27 16 36 36 61 0.29 17 36 36 34 0.14 18 32 32 30 0.62 19 32 33 32 0.36 20 31 31 30 0.54 21 31 31 53 0.56 22 31 38 31 0.39

of stable to unstable observations ranges from 0.09 to 0.99, with a mean of 0.56. All simulations produce a stability label, which we assume to be the ground truth label. Each OC is represented by four steady-state quantities per bus: active power, reactive power, voltage magnitude and phase angles, resulting in a 272-dimensional feature vector. Each experimental workflow and training size combination is run under four random seeds, with the mean of the selected metrics reported. We sample training subsets from the original pool of 120,000 OCs. We use stratified sampling on the binary target to preserve the target class proportions in the training datasets. We set a minimum of 1 sample per target class so that each class is represented in the training data at every data size. This prevents degenerate cases with data from only one class for datasets with severe class imbalance. We uniformly sample a separate test set of 12,000 samples. We have intentionally chosen a large test data size relative to the training data sizes to reliably evaluate the model’s generalization to new OCs within the same distribution. We ensure the same test set is used across different training dataset sizes for each seed. This ensures the evaluation is fair with identical test distributions at every size. We have used TabPFNv2.6 as the TFM in this work. The baseline classifiers were implemented with scikit-learn 

and XGBoost Python packages. The baseline models were implemented and run on an AMD EPYC-7302 CPU with 64GB memory, and the TFM was run on an Nvidia A30 GPU with 24GB memory and CUDA 12.11 

B. Evaluation metrics 

In this section, we introduce the four metrics used to evaluate the various models. Given that the DSA prediction task is a binary classification problem, we can obtain four types of results for each prediction: (1) A true positive (TP - secure case correctly predicted), (2) A false positive (FP - insecure case wrongly predicted as secure), (3) A true negative (TN - insecure case correctly predicted), (4) A false negative (FN - secure case wrongly predicted as insecure). The evaluation metrics are:  

> •

Balanced accuracy: This is the average recall obtained for each class, which corrects for class imbalance. Unlike simple accuracy, it does not get artificially inflated by the majority class and is better suited to tasks such as DSA, where insecure cases are rare: Balanced Accuracy = 12

 T P T P + F N + T N T N + F P 



(10)  

> •

Precision: This is the proportion of samples predicted as positive (secure) which are actually positive. A high precision means secure predictions are more reliable: Precision = T P T P + F P (11)  

> •

Specificity: This is the proportion of actually negative (in-secure) samples that are correctly identified as negative. A high specificity indicates the model misses fewer insecure cases. A high specificity is the most operationally critical metric for DSA: Specificity = T N T N + F P (12)  

> •

Macro F1: F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Macro F1 computes the F1 score for each class separately and then takes the average. This ensures each class contributes equally regardless of its frequency: 

F 1c = 2 T P c

2 T P c + F P c + F N c

(13) Macro average over C = 2 classes: Macro F1 = 12

> 2

X

> c=1

F 1c (14) 

C. Predictive performance of per-contingency workflow 

To test the sample efficiency and predictive performance of the TFM, we train a separate classifier for each of the 22 contingencies. We consider training budgets n of orders of magnitudes, n ∈ { 12 , 120 , 1200 , 12000 }. A training size of 12 represents a scarce data scenario where only a few TDS can be performed. On the other end, a training size of 12000 is consistent with typical training sizes in the literature [18], [32], [33]. The four baseline classifiers are tuned using 10 hyperparameter combinations evaluated with 3-fold cross-validation. This results in 30 model variants per combination of model, contingency, training size and random seed. The best model is selected based on its balanced accuracy and trained with the full training data split. Since the TFM requires no hyperparameter tuning, we simply fit one classifier per contingency, training size and random seed combination. Fig. 5a shows the average balanced accuracy across training dataset sizes. The TFM shows a significantly higher balanced accuracy at the smaller TDS data budgets, benefiting from the strong prior that the model provides. TFM also remains the best model at the biggest data budget, even though the gap to JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 712 120 1200 12000 

Training samples per contingency 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> Balanced accuracy
> (a)

12 120 1200 12000 

Training samples per contingency 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> Macro F1
> (b)

TFM 

XGBoost 

MLP 

DT 

SVM-RBF 

> Fig. 5: Balanced accuracy (a) and Macro F1 (b) of the TFM compared to the baseline models. The TFM consistently outperforms all four baselines across all the tested training dataset sizes.

baseline models gets smaller. We note that an MLP classifier could not be trained at the smallest budget of just 12 samples, as it led to severe overfitting and a degenerate model. The advantage of TFM over the baselines is even more pronounced when considering the Macro F1 score. Macro F1 balances the operational need for high precision (confidence in secure prediction) and high specificity (low missed alarms). The TFM achieves an average Macro F1 score of about 90% with just 120 training samples, as shown in Fig. 5b. It outperforms the closest baseline XGBoost by about 7% on average. Other baselines, apart from XGBoost , require an order of magnitude more labelled data to reach a similar performance. Since correctly identifying insecure cases is more opera-tionally important than correctly identifying secure ones, we focus on the specificity of the classifiers. Fig. 6 shows the specificity (insecure class recall) across the 4 data budgets. We observe that TFM outperforms the baselines by a considerable margin with only 12 training samples. With 120 samples, TFM reaches an average specificity of 81%, with the closest baseline being SVM-RBF with 79%. SVM-RBF (98%) slightly out-performs the TFM (97%) with 12000 samples, but trades off higher specificity with lower secure class recall (sensitivity). This is because SVM-RBF operates with a margin-based objective, which can be adjusted to prioritize specificity over sensitivity. TFM is the only model which correctly classifies up to 80% of all insecure cases on average when only 120 training samples are available. Finally, we compare the TFM to an oracle model, which picked the best-performing baseline classifier for each contin-gency. Fig. 7 shows the mean gap between the oracle model and the TFM across all training data budgets for balanced accuracy, Macro F1 and Specificity. The TFM outperforms the oracle model on balanced accuracy and Macro F1 but is inferior on Specificity. We note that the oracle model is an idealistic model that cannot be deployed in practice since it picks the best-performing model on the test dataset for each contingency. This is different from a classic ensemble model. The TFM still matches or outperforms the oracle model using 12 120 1200 12000 

> Training samples per contingency
> 0.0
> 0.25
> 0.5
> 0.75
> 1.0
> Specificity
> TFM
> XGBoost
> MLP
> DT
> SVM-RBF
> Fig. 6: Average specificity of the TFM and the baselines at different training budgets.

the best available baseline, with zero finetuning. The predictive advantage of TFM over the baselines is more pronounced at small data budgets and ’harder’ contingencies with high class imbalance, demonstrating its advantage in realistic operational scenarios. 

D. multi-contingency DSA classifier 

This case study tests whether a single model can assess 

k known contingencies simultaneously. We compare the use of a multi-label learning-based DSA approach (MDSA-S) [18] to a single pooled TFM applied to all 22 contingencies simultaneously. For both approaches, we assume the training data is fully labelled. We use the same set of 1200 OCs as training samples for each contingency. For the TFM approach, we added a one-hot encoding of fault ID to the feature vector to distinguish between faults. This brings the feature dimension to 294. The TFM is fitted with a combined 1200 x JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 8

22 context rows. The MDSA-S approach jointly couples the 1200 OC inputs with the complete 22-column label matrix. We train the model using the same proximal accelerated gradient approach as in [18]. We test both approaches using a separate test set of 12000 OCs per contingency. We report mean metrics across 4 seeds, averaged across all contingencies. Fig. 8a compares the performance of the pooled TFM and the MDSA-S approach. Across all 22 contingencies, the pooled TFM achieves higher balanced accuracy and Macro F1 than the MDSA-S approach. Fig. 8b shows the specificity of both approaches for all the contingencies. In particular, we focus on ’harder’ contingencies where the insecure class ratio is small. Once more, the pooled TFM shows robustness, with worst-case specificity of 61.2% and worst-case Macro F1 score of 85.9% for contingency 5, for which only 1% of samples are insecure as shown in Fig. 8b. In contrast, MDSA-S’s specificity degrades to 3.1% with a Macro F1 score of 52.6%. This indicates that for contingencies with rare insecure cases, it defaults to predicting secure cases and misses relevant insecure cases. However, MDSA-S closes the gap to the TFM on specificity when there is a balanced proportion of secure and insecure cases in the training data. We elaborate on this behaviour of the MDSA-S method from its objective function [18]. The objective of MDSA-S is to minimize: 

min 

> Wx,W y

12 ∥XW x + Y W y − Y ∥2 

> F

+ σ3 ∥Wx∥1

+σ4 ∥Wy ∥1 + σ5

2 tr  (1 − R)W ⊤ 

> x

Wx

 (15) where σ3, σ 4, and σ5 are hyperparameters of the optimization. 

Wx and Wy are model parameters of the features and labels, respectively. R is the label correlation matrix between different contingencies. X and Y are features and labels, respectively. The collapse in specificity for contingencies with severe class imbalance follows from minimizing: 

12 ∥XW x + Y W y − Y ∥2 

> F

. (16) For binary labels Y , this becomes a least-squares estimator of the conditional expectation E[y | x] = P (y = 1 | x). For a contingency with severe class imbalance, where the ratio of insecure classes k ≪ 1, the loss gradient X⊤(Xw − y),is dominated by (1 − k)n residuals from the secure class and only a small fraction kn of residuals from the insecure class. Therefore, the optimization leaves the decision boundary where the majority class are correctly predicted, and the model learns to ignore the minority class. Since the objective is symmetric in the two classes, it weights residuals from both classes equally, leading to proper discrimination only when the two classes are fairly balanced. For contingencies where the majority class is insecure, the majority class is correctly predicted, leading to high specificity in this case, but poor accuracy. This is also shown in Fig. 8b for contingencies 10 and 11, where the insecure class ratios are 91% and 90%, respectively. We summarize the mean performance across all contingen-cies in Tab. III. 12 120 1200 12000 

> Training samples per contingency
> 0.02
> 0.00
> 0.02
> 0.04
> 0.06
> Mean performance gap to
> Oracle model
> Balanced accuracy
> Macro F1
> Specificity
> Fig. 7: Mean performance gap between the TFM and an oracle model which chooses the best of the four baseline models for each contingency. Positive axis indicates the TFM is better, and negative axis indicates Oracle is better.

E. Unseen contingency generalization 

This case study examines the generalization of the TFM to some new, unseen contingency. As described in Section II.B, the system’s steady-state features need to be augmented with a scenario vector to distinguish between contingencies. First, we compare the impact of one-hot (OH) encoding, electrical distance coordinate (EDC) encoding and the proposed mod-EDC encoding as the scenario vector when generalizing to an unseen contingency. We use the multi-contingency DSA approach, whereby we consider 21 contingencies in the la-belled training data and one held-out contingency for testing. First, we randomly sample 1200 x 21 training OCs, for a total of 25,200 samples. Further, we downsample to 10,000 of the available 25,200 training samples to reduce memory usage and inference time in the prediction step. For the OH encoding and EDC-based approaches, we predict labels for a separate set of 12,000 OCs from the held-out contingency in a single forward pass of the TFM. Fig. 9 compares the performance of the three approaches across all four metrics. From the figure, EDC-based encoding decisively outperforms OH encoding on nearly all held-out contingencies. This can be attributed to the poor generalization of discrete encoding to unseen contingencies. The encoding for an unseen contingency occupies an orthogonal space relative to the training data; hence, the model’s accuracy declines because it cannot learn useful connections between the training data and the new scenario. The EDC approach from [14] provides the best representation as a scenario vector of the 3 approaches. EDC uses 8-dimensional coordinates, which represent the electrical distances from the faulted bus to the reference buses. For TFM, which works by ICL, the pre-trained transformer                 

> TABLE III: Comparison of pooled TFM and MDSA-S
> Metric TFM (%) MDSA-S (%) Improvement (%)
> Precision 96.49 94.87 +1.62 Specificity 90.57 75.66 +14.91 Macro F1 94.59 85.99 +8.60 Balanced accuracy 93.86 83.43 +10.43 JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 9

0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

MDSA-S 

0.5 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> TFM
> TFM better
> (a)

Balanced accuracy 

Macro F1 

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Insecure-class ratio 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Specificity
> Contingencies
> 10 & 11
> Contingency 5
> (b)

TFM 

MDSA-S 

> Fig. 8: Performance comparison of TFM and the MDSA-S baseline. (a) Pairwise scatterplot of balanced accuracy and Macro F1 for TFM versus MDSA-S. The diagonal represents where both methods have identical performance. TFM consistently outperforms MDSA-S for all 22 contingencies. (b) Specificity versus insecure-class ratio for all 22 contingencies. TFM shows robustness for contingencies where insecure cases are rare.

predicts for new rows by ’attending’ to context rows which are most similar to the query row. For the held-out contingency to be predicted, its query structure is (Xh, EDC h). EDC h

is present in the context rows if there is another contingency from the same location in the training data. Therefore, the TFM works by utilizing the decision boundary of the con-tingency which occurs at the electrically closest locations, in predicting for the new contingency. Contingencies which occur at the same location may have similar dynamic behavior [14]. However, transient instability may occur due to multiple factors, including fault location, post-fault topology, operating conditions, clearing time, etc. Therefore, contingency location alone is insufficient to determine dynamic behavior. We further analyze how EDC is used by TFM for generalizing to unseen contingencies in Tab. IV. Here, we consider locations which have multiple contingencies in the dataset. Macro F1, averaged over contingencies which share the same bus (same EDC encoding), tends to degrade as the range of stable label proportions between the contingencies increases. Faults which have different dynamic behavior (evidenced by a significant difference in the proportion of stable labels for the same distribution of OCs) share the same decision boundary, which leads to poor prediction accuracy. Since the TFM is sample efficient and requires no fine-tuning, we consider a few-shot experiment where a few labels may be generated for the new fault. Here, we assume n ∈ { 10 , 100 , 1000 } labelled data may be generated for the new contingency. We randomly sample 

n additional OCs for the new contingency to augment the training data. Fig. 10 shows the average balanced accuracy across all 22 held-out contingencies for OH, EDC and mod-EDC approaches. When there is no labelled data for the new contingency (zero-shot), EDC is the strongest label-free encoding. However, we observe a crossover point from 10 additional labelled samples, where the mod-EDC outperforms the EDC encoding. Hence, mod-EDC only helps when there are a few labelled samples available for few-shot adaptation. We argue that TFM can quickly adapt its prediction with just a few samples of the new contingency because it can accurately estimate the label distribution P (y), with as few as 10 samples, and can thus shift the decision boundary appropriately. Finally, we compare the generalization performance of TFM with that of the transfer learning approach in [17]. The transfer learning approach employs joint domain adaptation (JDA) between 2 contingency pairs, based on the assumption that the new/unseen contingency is related to a known one in the training database. The known contingency is the source domain, while the new contingency is the target. We have used XGBoost from the first study as the DSA model in our JDA implementation. In turn, each contingency in the list is chosen as the target, with every other contingency chosen as the source. This leads to 21 x 22 pairs of source and target contingencies. Fig. 11 shows the average balanced accuracy achieved by three methods with JDA and the TFM with few-shot learning. JDA-best is computed by selecting the                                       

> TABLE IV: Zeroshot generalization of TFM with EDC encoding for same-bus contingencies Faulted Fault Range of stable Average Bus IDs proportion Macro F1 25 6,7 0.00 0.95 58 8,9 0.00 0.88 23 1,2 0.01 0.91 29 10,11 0.01 0.96 62 4,5 0.03 0.73 36 16,17 0.15 0.77 31 20,21,22 0.17 0.89 32 18,19 0.26 0.74 54 12,13,14 0.40 0.70 JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 10 Balanced
> Accuracy
> Precision Specificity Macro F1
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> 0.73
> 0.67
> 0.64
> 0.59
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.81
> 0.83
> 0.84
> 0.82
> 0.77
> 0.80
> OH EDC mod-EDC
> Fig. 9: The EDC encoding is the best for zero-shot generalization to unseen contingencies of the three approaches.

0 10 100 1000 

Injected target contingencies ( nTDS )

0.7 

0.8 

0.9 

1.0 

> Balanced accuracy
> One-hot
> EDC
> mod-EDC
> Fig. 10: The proposed mod-EDC encoding enables better fewshot generaliza-tion with 10 to 100 additional labelled samples. With 1000 additional samples, all 3 approaches converge to the same accuracy.

best source contingency for every target. JDA-best can only be computed post-hoc, that is, we evaluate the best source contingency for every target by comparing the predicted labels from each JDA source model to the actual target labels. Hence, 

JDA-best can be described as the theoretical upper bound of achievable accuracy with transfer learning via JDA for the set of contingencies considered. Note that JDA-best cannot be deployed in practice because it requires (unavailable) full labels from the target contingency to choose the best source contingency for the transfer learning. Meanwhile, JDA-EDC 

selects the source contingency for every target by choosing the electrically closest contingency from the training database. This is done by computing the L2 distance between the EDC vector of the target contingency and every possible source contingency in the training database, and choosing the source with the smallest distance. Similarly, JDA-mod-EDC selects the source contingency for each target by choosing the closest based on the proposed mod-EDC vector. With TFM+10 , we consider the use of TFM with mod-EDC encoding, and 10 additional labelled samples from the target domain added to the model’s context. JDA-best outperforms both JDA-EDC 

and JDA-mod-EDC as we would expect, since both EDC and mod-EDC cannot correctly choose the best source for every target without additional labelled data from the target domain. Fig. 12 shows the mutual transfer accuracy (MTA) between each pair of contingencies. We observe that MTA shows a strong correlation with the label distribution, P (y).Two contingencies with similar label distributions have high MTA and vice versa. Surprisingly, TFM+10 performs on par with JDA-best using just 10 additional labelled samples randomly generated from the distribution of OCs as previously described. We want to emphasize that, unlike typical transfer learning, where the model has to be fine-tuned with additional weight update steps, TFM+10 requires no additional weight updates. The additional labelled samples may simply be added to the model context, and the model automatically takes them into account in the prediction step. Furthermore, Tab. V compares the four approaches across all metrics used and highlights the remarkable generalization performance achieved by TFM via few-shot learning. 

F. Computational performance 

ML-based DSA approaches are motivated by the need for near real-time security assessment. Therefore, it is important to analyze the computational cost of the proposed approach. For our evaluation, we consider the total time for training, hyper-parameter tuning and inference. The proposed approach has no training and hyperparameter tuning time, so the computational cost consists mainly of the prediction step. Tab. VI shows the computational cost of the various models. The baseline models incur most of their cost in the hyperparameter tuning step, which scales unfavourably with the training data size and the number of models/contingencies to train. TFM performs ICL with no hyperparameter tuning, so the cost grows mildly with the number of training samples. The proposed approach is therefore both accurate and computationally efficient. In the multi-contingency DSA setting, a single TFM which predicts for all known contingencies incurs 137s on average. This is approximately 1.5 times longer than the MDSA-S baseline. However, the two approaches incur cost in the same order of magnitude, and the performance improvement the TFM offers over the baseline is a reasonable trade for a modest increase in computational time. We note that the TFM computation was done on a GPU compared to the baselines, which can only use a CPU. Also, the computational cost of TFM grows significantly with the number of features due to the underly-ing transformer architecture. In larger systems, this may be                      

> TABLE V: Three JDA approaches compared with the TFM+10 approach, which uses few-shot learning with 10 additional labelled samples. TFM+10 is on par with or exceeds the theoretically best JDA approach on 2 of the four metrics.
> Metric Bal. Acc. Macro F1 Spec. Prec.
> JDA (best) 0.88 0.84 0.98 0.94 JDA (EDC) 0.85 0.81 0.84 0.88 JDA (mod-EDC) 0.77 0.74 0.73 0.79 TFM+10 0.88 0.87 0.84 0.91 JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 11

JDA 

(best) 

JDA 

(EDC) 

JDA 

(mod-EDC) 

TFM +10 

(mod-EDC) 

0.6 

0.7 

0.8 

0.9                      

> Balanced accuracy
> 0.88
> 0.81
> 0.77
> 0.88
> Fig. 11: TFM with few-shot learning (TFM+10) performs on par with the ideal transfer learning approach via joint domain adaptation (JDA-best). JDA-best is not deployable in practice, since the best source for each target contingency cannot be determined. 10 11 17 15 16 7619 22 14 13 20 21 18 32112 9845
> Target
> 10
> 11
> 17
> 15
> 16
> 7
> 6
> 19
> 22
> 14
> 13
> 20
> 21
> 18
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 12
> 9
> 8
> 4
> 5
> Source
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Mutual Transfer Accuracy (%)
> Fig. 12: Mutual transfer accuracy (MTA) between all contingency pairs.

challenging. Dimensionality reduction techniques and training data sampling may be used to keep memory consumption and computational costs tractable.                                      

> TABLE VI: Average total time in seconds for model training, hyperparameter tuning and inference for TFM and the various baselines. Model Training data size 12 120 1200 12000 1200 ×22
> TFM 6.60 7.30 12.01 56.96 137.14 XGBoost 1.98 4.19 21.92 75.27 —MLP —1.15 21.50 359.96 —DT 0.04 0.19 2.82 40.99 —SVM-RBF 0.11 0.32 9.41 1212.13 —MDSA-S ————93.14

V. D ISCUSSIONS 

To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to demonstrate the application of a foundation model to data-driven pre-fault DSA. The proposed TFM approach for pre-fault DSA is promising, outperforming baselines from the literature while demonstrating the potential to reduce the computational cost of generating labelled data. The proposed workflow is also flexible, adapting to single-contingency or multi-contingency DSA settings without performance degrada-tion. Compared with the baselines, the proposed approach’s ro-bustness to severe class imbalance is also notable. For unseen contingencies, the TFM’s sample efficiency becomes a critical operational advantage, as relatively few labelled samples are needed to generalize to new contingencies. Where additional training data for the new contingency cannot be generated, the proposed TFM approach may be combined with EDC encoding of contingency location for zero-shot generalization. The mod-EDC encoding is designed for scenarios where a few additional labelled samples of the new contingency may be generated via TDS. This scenario is operationally relevant, since generating a small number of samples in the online phase is realistic and no additional model training is required. Overall, the proposed workflow positively answers the three questions posed in Section III-C. Our approach represents a viable solution to the issues of large database requirements and inadequate generalization to new contingencies. Apart from the strong predictive performance of the proposed approach, TFM also provides additional capabilities relevant to DSA applications. Such capabilities include synthetic data gener-ation for data augmentation, probability density estimation for uncertainty quantification and interpretability analysis for feature selection. We leave the exploration of these aspects for future studies. Despite the discussed advantages, a few key limitations are noted. First, for a DSA workflow which considers many contingencies, separate TFM classifiers may be needed for each contingency for computational efficiency. The TFM we have adopted in this work is limited to inputs of 100,000 samples and 2000 features, which may be inad-equate for large systems. Like other ML for pre-fault DSA approaches, our approach does not guarantee perfect stability prediction; hence, the model output should be properly vali-dated by system operators before a decision is taken. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We have shown how the current data-driven pre-fault DSA workflow leads to the need for a large TDS computational budget for training database generation. In response, we have proposed the use of a TFM for pre-fault DSA. Through case studies on the IEEE 68-bus system, we have shown that the TFM attains practical DSA accuracy with an average Macro F1 score of 90% while using two orders of magnitude fewer labelled samples per contingency than is conventionally assumed, without any model retraining or hyperparameter tuning. For generalization to new/unseen contingencies, we characterize where EDC encoding fails and where it succeeds. We show that injecting just 10 additional labelled samples of the new contingency matches the best possible oracle transfer-learning model, which uses full target labels from the new contingency and is not deployable in practice. Furthermore, the TFM is also shown to outperform the multi-label DSA approach at predicting multiple known faults with a single model. Overall, the combined workflow in this paper requires JOURNAL OF XXXXXX, VOL XX, JULY 2026 12 

less data, significantly reducing the computational burden of offline database generation for DSA applications, while achieving new SOTA predictive performance. In the future, this approach may be extended to larger test systems, advanced feature selection and dimensionality reduction techniques, and interpretability of model predictions to improve operator confidence. REFERENCES [1] P. Panciatici, G. Bareux, and L. Wehenkel, “Operating in the Fog: Security Management Under Uncertainty,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 40–49, Sep. 2012. [2] X. Zhang, Q. Wang, X. Bi, D. Li, D. Liu, Y. Yu, and C. K. Tse, “Mitigating cascading failure in power grids with deep reinforcement learning-based remedial actions,” Reliability Engineering & System Safety , vol. 250, p. 110242, Oct. 2024. [3] F. Bellizio, J. L. Cremer, and G. Strbac, “Machine-learned security assessment for changing system topologies,” International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems , vol. 134, p. 107380, Jan. 2022. [4] L. Duchesne, E. Karangelos, and L. Wehenkel, “Recent Developments in Machine Learning for Energy Systems Reliability Management,” 

Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 108, no. 9, pp. 1656–1676, Sep. 2020. [5] L. A. Wehenkel, Automatic Learning Techniques in Power Systems .Boston, MA: Springer US, 1998. [6] S. C. Savulescu, Ed., Real-Time Stability in Power Systems: Techniques for Early Detection of the Risk of Blackout , ser. Power Electronics and Power Systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2014. [7] A.-A. B. Bugaje, J. L. Cremer, M. Sun, and G. Strbac, “Selecting decision trees for power system security assessment,” Energy and AI ,vol. 6, p. 100110, Dec. 2021. [8] J. Tang and H. Sui, “Power System Transient Stability Assessment Based on Stacked Autoencoders and Support Vector Machine,” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering , vol. 452, p. 042117, Dec. 2018. [9] S. Song, S.-w. Min, and S. Jung, “Steady-state data-driven dynamic stability assessment in the Korean power system,” Scientific Reports ,vol. 15, no. 1, p. 7756, Mar. 2025. [10] J. J. Q. Yu, D. J. Hill, A. Y. S. Lam, J. Gu, and V. O. K. Li, “Intelligent Time-Adaptive Transient Stability Assessment System,” IEEE Transac-tions on Power Systems , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1049–1058, Jan. 2018. [11] A. Gupta, G. Gurrala, and P. S. Sastry, “An Online Power System Stability Monitoring System Using Convolutional Neural Networks,” 

IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 864–872, Mar. 2019. [12] W. Cui, W. Yang, and B. Zhang, “A Frequency Domain Approach to Predict Power System Transients,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems ,vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 465–477, Jan. 2024. [13] M. Karacelebi and J. L. Cremer, “Online Neural Dynamics Forecasting for power system security,” International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems , vol. 167, p. 110566, Jun. 2025. [14] H. Qi, C. Li, Y. Liu, R. Sun, and J. Yan, “Continuous Feature Represen-tation of Fault Location Based on Electrical Distance for Generalizable Data-Driven Dynamic Security Assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 2930–2942, Jul. 2025. [15] I. Konstantelos, G. Jamgotchian, S. H. Tindemans, P. Duchesne, S. Cole, C. Merckx, G. Strbac, and P. Panciatici, “Implementation of a Massively Parallel Dynamic Security Assessment Platform for Large-Scale Grids,” 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1417–1426, May 2017. [16] T. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Liu, L. Wang, L. Xu, G. Qiu, and H. Gao, “A Bayesian Learning Based Scheme for Online Dynamic Security Assessment and Preventive Control,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4088–4099, Sep. 2020. [17] C. Ren and Y. Xu, “Transfer Learning-Based Power System Online Dynamic Security Assessment: Using One Model to Assess Many Unlearned Faults,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 821–824, Jan. 2020. [18] C. Ren, H. Yuan, Q. Li, R. Zhang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-Fault Dynamic Security Assessment of Power Systems for Multiple Different Faults via Multi-Label Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 5501–5511, Nov. 2023. [19] K. Sun, S. Likhate, V. Vittal, V. S. Kolluri, and S. Mandal, “An Online Dynamic Security Assessment Scheme Using Phasor Measurements and Decision Trees,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1935–1943, Nov. 2007. [20] O. Arowolo, J. Stiasny, and J. Cremer, “Exploring extrapolation of machine learning models for power system time domain simulation,” 

Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , vol. 43, p. 101908, Sep. 2025. [21] C. Liu, K. Sun, Z. H. Rather, Z. Chen, C. L. Bak, P. Thøgersen, and P. Lund, “A Systematic Approach for Dynamic Security Assessment and the Corresponding Preventive Control Scheme Based on Decision Trees,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 717– 730, Mar. 2014. [22] B. Giraud, L. Charles, A. M. Nakiganda, J. Vorwerk, and S. Chatzi-vasileiadis, “A dataset generation toolbox for dynamic security assess-ment: On the role of the security boundary,” Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , vol. 43, p. 101833, Sep. 2025. [23] A.-A. B. Bugaje, J. L. Cremer, and G. Strbac, “Split-based sequential sampling for realtime security assessment,” International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems , vol. 146, p. 108790, Mar. 2023. [24] H. F. Hamann et al. , “Foundation models for the electric power grid,” 

Joule , vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 3245–3258, Dec. 2024. [25] H. Li, L. Mai, C. Xiao, E. Blasch, and Y. Weng, “Predicting Power-System Dynamic Trajectories with Foundation Models,” arXiv , 2026. [26] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under Concept Drift: A Review,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , pp. 1–1, 2018. [27] S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and J. W. Vaughan, “A theory of learning from different domains,” Machine Learning , vol. 79, no. 1-2, pp. 151–175, May 2010. [28] S. B. David, T. Lu, T. Luu, and D. Pal, “Impossibility Theorems for Domain Adaptation,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, 13–15 May 2010, pp. 129–136. [29] N. Hollmann, S. M¨ uller, L. Purucker, A. Krishnakumar, M. K¨ orfer, S. B. Hoo, R. T. Schirrmeister, and F. Hutter, “Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model,” Nature , vol. 637, no. 8045, pp. 319–326, Jan. 2025. [30] T. Brown et al. , “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1877–1901. [31] P. Bikash and C. Balarko, Robust Control in Power Systems , 1st ed., ser. Power Electronics and Power Systems. Springer New York, NY, Jun. 2005, no. 2196-3185. [32] J. L. Cremer, I. Konstantelos, and G. Strbac, “From Optimization-Based Machine Learning to Interpretable Security Rules for Operation,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 3826–3836, Sep. 2019. [33] T. Zhang, M. Sun, J. L. Cremer, N. Zhang, G. Strbac, and C. Kang, “A Confidence-Aware Machine Learning Framework for Dynamic Security Assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3907–3920, Sep. 2021.