Title: 2026.acl-long.1249.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1249.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 27130–27152 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# DR-Arena: an Automated Evaluation Framework for Deep Research Agents 

Yiwen Gao 1* Ruochen Zhao 2* Yang Deng 3 Wenxuan Zhang 4†1National University of Singapore 2Nanyang Technological University 

> 3

Singapore Management University 4Singapore University of Technology and Design 

yiwen_gao@u.nus.edu ruochen002@e.ntu.edu.sg ydeng@smu.edu.sg wxzhang@sutd.edu.sg https://github.com/iNLP-Lab/DR-Arena 

Abstract 

As Large Language Models (LLMs) increas-ingly operate as Deep Research (DR) Agents 

capable of autonomous investigation and infor-mation synthesis, reliable evaluation of their task performance has become a critical bottle-neck. Current benchmarks predominantly rely on static datasets, which suffer from several limitations: limited task generality , temporal misalignment , and data contamination . To ad-dress these, we introduce DR-Arena , a fully automated evaluation framework that pushes DR agents to their capability limits through dynamic investigation. DR-Arena constructs real-time Information Trees from fresh web trends to ensure the evaluation rubric is syn-chronized with the live world state, and em-ploys an automated Examiner to generate struc-tured tasks testing two orthogonal capabilities: 

Deep reasoning and Wide coverage . DR-Arena further adopts Adaptive Evolvement Loop, a state-machine controller that dynamically esca-lates task complexity based on real-time perfor-mance, demanding deeper deduction or wider aggregation until a decisive capability bound-ary emerges. Experiments with six advanced DR agents demonstrate that DR-Arena achieves a Spearman correlation of 0.94 with the LM-SYS Search Arena leaderboard. This represents state-of-the-art alignment with human prefer-ences without any manual efforts, validating DR-Arena as a reliable alternative for costly human adjudication. 

1 Introduction 

Deep Research (DR) agents, such as OpenAI Deep Research (OpenAI, 2025) and Perplexity Deep Research (Perplexity AI, 2025), have rapidly gained adoption and are now widely used for com-plex information-seeking tasks. Unlike traditional search engines where users need to browse multiple websites manually, DR agents act as autonomous   

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

research agents that conduct multi-step investiga-tions over extended horizons, iteratively retrieving, cross-referencing, and synthesizing evidence from the live web to produce structured and citation-backed reports (Nakano et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024; Qin et al., 2023). As DR agents are increas-ingly deployed in real-world and high-stakes ana-lytical settings, efficient and reliable evaluation of their capabilities has become a pressing challenge. Recent efforts have begun to evaluate deep research capabilities by constructing dedicated datasets for multi-step web-based investigation (Mi-alon et al., 2024; Wong et al., 2025; Lan et al., 2025). While these benchmarks provide useful per-formance indicators, they exhibit three fundamen-tal limitations: 1) limited task generality , as task-centric and aspect-specific dataset construction re-stricts evaluation to predefined investigation pat-terns and weakens transferability to real-world re-search settings; 2) temporal misalignment , since static benchmarks inevitably decay as underlying facts evolve, resulting in evaluation against out-dated ground truth; and 3) data contamination ,whereby persistent and widely reused datasets in-creasingly appear in model training corpora, result-ing in parametric memorization rather than genuine reasoning and evidence synthesis (Ravaut et al., 2025). Collectively, these issues reflect a structural mismatch with DR agents, which are designed to operate in open evolving environments that require adaptive exploration and reasoning. To address these challenges, we propose DR-Arena, a fully automated evaluation framework that simulates a competitive arena, where DR agents are pushed to their capability limits through dynamic investigation. As shown in Figure 1, DR-Arena operates as a closed-loop framework orchestrated by an automated Examiner, which functions as an interviewer role that drafts questions, assesses can-didate answers, and conducts follow-up rounds. To draft dynamic questions, the Examiner first con-

27130 Examiner    

> Topic
> e.g. Games
> Informative website
> Information Tree
> DR-Agent A DR-Agent B
> Response A Response B
> Automated Task Generation
> Grades
> Refinement
> Dynamic Information
> Tree Construction
> Adaptive Evolvement Loop
> 12
> Question
> Rubrics
> 3

Figure 1: Overview of the DR-Arena Framework. 

structs Information Trees by scraping informative websites in real-time. Based on the trees, the Ex-aminer then devises a challenging question for the candidate DR agents. Since the Examiner has ac-cess to the ground-truth information source, it also keeps a mental set of grounded rubrics. After the agents respond, the Examiner assesses their perfor-mances based on the rubrics. Finally, it enters the Adaptive Evolvement Loop, where the Examiner dynamically decides whether to further refine the tree and ask follow-up questions. During Adaptive Evolvement, DR-Arena stress-tests two fundamental dimensions: multi-hop rea-soning ( Depth ) and information gathering ( Width ). The Examiner actively intervenes based on real-time performance to amplify differences between candidates: When agents reach a stalemate, the Examiner first diagnoses the failure type, whether the mistake originates from a retrieval gap or rea-soning deficit, and then intentionally probes that specific weakness in subsequent rounds. This dy-namic investigation, guided by the Depth and Width 

principles (Lan et al., 2025), ensures that both core abilities are tested comprehensively, pushing DR agents to their capability boundaries. Experiments across six state-of-the-art DR agents show that DR-Arena achieves superior align-ment with human preferences compared to ex-isting benchmarks, accurately recovering the hi-erarchy of the LMSYS Search Arena (Miroyan et al., 2026) even without manual annotations. Be-yond alignment, we demonstrate that the adap-tive loop optimizes computational allocation, con-centrating computational resources on distinguish-ing closely matched models while rapidly resolv-ing mismatches. Furthermore, we conduct exten-sive analysis that reveals distinct cognitive profiles among top-tier DR agents, distinguishing models with robust, balanced capabilities from those ex-hibiting asymmetric trade-offs between logic and coverage. In conclusion, DR-Arena serves as a trustworthy and scalable proxy for human adjudi-cation, offering the community a reliable standard to benchmark the next generation of DR agents. 

2 Related Work 

Static Benchmarks for Deep Research. Eval-uation in Agentic Search has traditionally relied on static benchmarks. Early works like WebArena 

(Zhou et al., 2024) and BrowseComp (Wei et al., 2025) focused on transactional web tasks, while later benchmarks extended to deep research via expert-curated datasets, including DeepResearch Bench (Du et al., 2025) and DeepResearch Arena 

(Wan et al., 2026). Despite increased task complex-ity, these benchmarks remain static and thus suffer from temporal degradation (Kasai et al., 2023): As real-world information evolves, fixed gold an-swers become outdated, penalizing agents that cor-rectly retrieve fresh evidence (Vu et al., 2024). Ap-proaches such as LiveBench (White et al., 2025) mitigate contamination through periodic updates, but still rely on batch refreshes rather than real-time generation. DR-Arena fundamentally departs from this paradigm by generating Dynamic Information Trees directly from the live web, synchronizing tasks and ground truth with the current world state and eliminating both temporal misalignment and parametric memorization. 

Automated Evaluation Frameworks. To scale beyond human review, prior work has adopted auto-mated evaluation frameworks, most notably LLM-as-a-Judge (Zheng et al., 2023) and its refinements in leaderboards such as AlpacaEval (Dubois et al., 2025) and Auto-Arena (Zhao et al., 2025), which re-27131 duce single-judge bias via multi-agent deliberation with “Peer Battle” and “Committee” mechanisms. In the agentic domain, frameworks like Mind2Web-2 (Gou et al., 2025) and Auto-Eval Judge (Bhonsle et al., 2025) have evolved into “Agent-as-a-Judge” systems, utilizing structured checklists to verify step-by-step execution. However, the majority of these frameworks operate as passive evaluators, where they grade static trajectories after the task is completed. While FACT-AUDIT (Lin et al., 2025) introduces adaptive stress-testing, it remains lim-ited to short-horizon factual claims. DR-Arena de-parts from this paradigm by introducing an active Examiner for long-horizon Deep Research, where an Adaptive Evolvement Loop dynamically mod-ulates task depth and width during evaluation to expose capability boundaries that static datasets or passive evaluators fail to expose. 

3 DR-Arena Framework 

To probe the limits of DR agents, DR-Arena op-erates as a closed-loop system orchestrated by a unified LLM agent, denoted as Examiner. As il-lustrated in Figure 1, the pipeline consists of three sequential stages: Dynamic Information Tree Con-struction, Automated Task Generation, and Adap-tive Evolvement Loop. Detailed prompts and con-figuration settings are provided in Appendix A. 

3.1 Dynamic Information Tree Construction 

To ensure that the evaluation reflects the complex-ity and timeliness of the real internet, DR-Arena directly scrapes and structures real-world websites into a verifiable knowledge base, as illustrated by the instantiated example in Figure 2. To ensure task diversity, the Examiner first sam-ples a seed topic from Google Trends 1 and navi-gates to a specific sub-topic, e.g. “Handheld Con-soles” → “Nintendo History” . Then, it generates a relevant search query to retrieve top websites from the open web. Among the top returned URLs, the Examiner selects a high-quality informative web-site to use as a “Root Node” ( vroot ) for the Infor-mation Tree, which is typically a comprehensive guide or hub page with rich outbound links From vroot , the system constructs an Information Tree by scraping this page and its linked neighbors. We could represent the Information Tree as a di-rected graph G = ( V, E ). Each node vi ∈ V

> 1https://github.com/pat310/google-trends-api /wiki/Google-Trends-Categories

represents a real webpage, containing the full text content Ci and metadata (URL, title). An edge 

eij ∈ E exists if node vi contains a hyperlink to vj .To capture inter-node relationships Rij , we enrich edges with semantic context by analyzing anchor text and surrounding content to derive relationship types such as varieties or processes. While we limit the Information Tree size at first, the tree can be expanded in two orthogonal direc-tions during the process: Depth Expansion recur-sively crawls specific branches to depth d to es-tablish reasoning chains (e.g., Handheld Console History → Specific Console → Technical Specs) supporting Multi-hop Reasoning Tasks ; Width Ex-pansion captures sibling nodes sharing the same parent and semantic relationship (e.g., multiple handheld consoles listed on the history page) to support aggregation tasks. 

3.2 Automated Task Generation 

Leveraging the Information Tree, the Examiner dy-namically generates questions to probe two core capabilities of DR agents: multi-hop reasoning (depth ) and information gathering ( width ). 

Depth and Width Principles. When generating questions, we utilize the definition of depth and 

width from Lan et al. (2025). First, depth refers to the search steps required, which could be directly visualized by the tree depth. For example, deep reasoning tasks mask the target entity’s name, re-quiring multi-hop deduction through relationship chains (e.g., “Identify the 1989 handheld console designed by the creator of the Game & Watch se-ries”). Second, width refers to the number of in-formation units to be searched, which can be visu-alized as tree width. Wide coverage tasks require synthesizing attributes across sibling nodes, de-manding comprehensive aggregation through par-allel entity comparisons (e.g., “Compare the bat-tery specifications of the identified console against its market competitors”). Collectively, depth and 

width constitute two fundamental capabilities of DR agents: reasoning and information gathering. 

Task Generation. The Examiner then generates a challenging question based on the Information Tree. First, it randomly selects a node from the tree and performs a validation check: if the cur-rent node lacks sufficient depth (no children) or width (no siblings) to support a challenging query, the system automatically triggers the crawler to 27132 ROOT             

> Topic: Handheld Console History (1989-1991)
> Source Domain:
> en.wikipedia.org
> Context: 4th Generation Video Games
> Depth 0
> Ancestor Node
> Nintendo Lead Designer ( Gunpei Yokoi ); Famous Creation -"Game & Watch" Series
> Depth 1
> Target Node
> Entity - Nintendo
> Game Boy
> Release Year 1989
> Screen Dot-matrix
> [Non-backlit]
> Power 4x AA Batteries
> Depth 2
> Sibling 1
> Entity - Atari Lynx Release Year 1989 Screen Color LCD [Backlit]
> Power 6x AA Batteries
> Sibling 2
> Entity - Sega Game Gear Release Year 1991 Screen Color LCD [Backlit]
> Power 6x AA Batteries

A. Deep Reasoning      

> "Identify the 1989 handheld console designed by the creator of the 'Game & Watch' series. "
> Creator of Game&Watch —> Gunpei Yokoi Gunpei Yokoi + 1989 —> Game Boy

B. Wide Coverage 

Final Question & Rubrics                    

> Search Query: " handheld game consoles history guide "
> "Compare the battery requirements and screen technology
> of the identified console against
> Atari Lynx and Sega Game Gear ."
> Game Boy :4x AA, Non-backlit...
> Lynx/Game Gear :6x AA, Backlit...
> [Deep Rubrics]
> Nintendo Game Boy - identified via "Game & Watch" creator lineage
> [Wide Rubrics ]
> Screen Tech: Non-backlit (Target )vs. Backlit/Color (Lynx/ Game Gear )
> Battery : 4x AA ( Target ) vs. 6x AA (Lynx /Game Gear ) & resulting battery life gap "Identify the 1989 handheld console designed by the creator of the 'Game & Watch' series . Then, conduct a comparative technical analysis of this device against the
> Atari Lynx and Sega Game Gear ,focusing on the trade-offs between
> screen technology and battery requirements , and how these specifications influenced their portability."

Figure 2: Automated Task Generation via Dynamic Information Trees. 

fetch fresh data, expanding the tree structure on-the-fly. Then, the Examiner drafts a challenging query to probe both depth and width capabilities. To prevent candidates from taking shortcuts, the Examiner employs a de-contextualization strategy: When generating queries, the Examiner is strictly prohibited from mentioning specific filenames or website titles. Since the ground truth ranging from logical lin-eages to attribute values is structurally encoded in the tree, the Examiner simultaneously synthesizes a list of rubrics that is factually correct and traceable to source URLs. This list includes a Checklist-Depth for verifying logical identity and a Checklist-Width for assessing data completeness. Representa-tive task examples are provided in Appendix B. 

3.3 Adaptive Evolvement Loop 

After task generation, the Examiner assesses the candidate responses against the rubrics and enters the Adaptive Evolvement Loop, where it dynami-cally decides whether to draft follow-up questions to push candidates to their capability boundaries and hence make the performance gaps more visible. 

Failure Tag Diagnostic Criteria DEPTH Logic Failure. Failed to identify the correct core entity due to a broken reasoning chain. 

WIDTH Coverage Failure. Failed to aggregate spe-cific attribute details (Data Gap). 

BOTH Systemic Failure. Failed on both logical iden-tification and factual completeness. 

NONE Soft Gap. The loss was determined solely by soft filters (formatting or utility preferences). 

Table 1: Taxonomy of Failure Types. The Examiner provides a diagnostic tag in verdicts. 

Evidence-Based Judgment. Evaluating open-ended reports is inherently challenging due to the lack of ground-truth data. DR-Arena addresses this by employing the Examiner as a Judge, utilizing the generated rubrics via a strict two-stage proto-col: First, the Examiner verifies Hard Constraints 

by checking against the list of rubrics. A critical error, such as misidentifying the core entity (logic error) or omitting mandatory data points (coverage gap), results in immediate penalties. Then, the Ex-aminer evaluates Soft Constraints , comparing user experience aspects such as presentation quality, for-matting, information density, and helpfulness. Instead of a simple binary win/loss, we adopt a tiered adjudication system to capture the mag-nitude of performance gaps with finer granularity. When a candidate (A or B) wins, the verdict distin-guishes whether it is a decisive win or a marginal win. Ties are also classified into High Quality (mu-tual success) or Low Quality (mutual hallucination) to inform the subsequent evolution strategy. 

Verdict (A, B ) ∈



MUCH BETTER (Decisive Win) 

BETTER (Marginal Win) 

TIE :

{

Both High Quality Both Low Quality (1) 

Guided by the Depth and Width principles, the Examiner also performs a failure type analysis on the losing side’s response: Whether it is a Depth failure, a Width failure, or both/none. Detailed explanations on these failure types are outlined in Table 1. This distinction is critical as it disentan-gles reasoning deficits from retrieval gaps, provid-ing the necessary signal for the Evolvement Loop to intelligently target the specific weakness in the subsequent rounds. 27133 Adjudication Verdict Diagnostic Signal Evolution Action Strategic Rationale Tie (High Quality) N/A Pressure Test (D ↑ 1 & W ↑ 1) Current task too easy; find ceiling.                            

> Tie (Low Quality) N/A Backtrack (Move to Parent) Current task too hard; re-establish baseline.
> Winner Decided
> DEPTH (Logic Failure) Probe Depth (D↑1)Challenge loser’s reasoning capabilities. WIDTH (Coverage Failure) Probe Width (W↑1)Challenge loser’s information coverage. BOTH / N ONE Pressure Test (D↑1&W↑1)Ambiguous failure; increase difficulty.

Table 2: The Evolvement Loop Transition Matrix. The system dynamically adjusts task complexity (Depth D

and Width W ) based on adjudication verdict and diagnostic failure type of the losing agent. 

Follow-up Rounds. After each round, the Exam-iner analyzes the verdict and failure type to operate on a targeted probing strategy to accelerate perfor-mance divergence and reach a decisive verdict, as outlined in Table 2, if a High-quality Tie occurs, the system triggers a pressure test, increasing both depth ( D) and width ( W ) parameters to locate the capability ceiling. Conversely, if a marginal win occurs, the system aggressively targets the loser’s specific weakness, probing either depth or width. This adaptive mechanism ensures the system efficiently converges to a verdict by continuously pushing agents toward their specific breakdown points. The loop terminates when a decisive “Much Better” verdict is reached, the cumulative score difference exceeds a threshold, or the maximum round limit is met. Complete pseudo-code and a full match walkthrough are in Appendix C and D. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Model Choice. From the pool of 13 models listed on LMSYS Search Arena (as of Dec 3, 2025), we select 6 representative models covering the latest or best-performing versions from major model fam-ilies: GPT-5.1-Search (OpenAI), Gemini-2.5-Pro-Grounding (Google), o3-Search (OpenAI), Grok-4-Search (xAI), Perplexity-Sonar-Pro-High (Per-plexity), and Claude-Opus-4.1-Search (Anthropic). As good-performing LLMs tend to perform better in LLM-as-a-judge tasks (Zheng et al., 2023), we choose Gemini-3-Pro as the fixed Examiner, which is currently the best model on LMSYS Text Arena. 

Baselines. We compare DR-Arena against six re-cent benchmarks for evaluating DR search agents, including BrowseComp (Wei et al., 2025), Deep-Research Bench (Du et al., 2025), LiveNewsBench (Zhang et al., 2026), LiveSearchBench (Zhou et al., 2025), LiveResearchBench (Wang et al., 2025), and Deep Research Bench (FutureSearch et al., 2025). Details of these benchmarks are shown in Appendix E. As a reference, we utilize the LMSYS Search Arena scores as the human-annotated ground truth for evaluating alignment of the resulting rankings. They rely on large-scale blind human comparisons to establish trustworthy model rankings. 

Tournament Configuration. To maximize com-putational efficiency, we conduct a Swiss-style tour-nament: For n participants, instead of pairing each participant with (n − 1) others, a Swiss tournament pairs each player with ⌈log 2(n)⌉ players of similar rankings without repeats. This design effectively reduces computational costs of ranking n models from O(n2) to O(n log 2(n)) . To mitigate bias, the tournament begins with a randomized initialization, followed by 4 rounds of dynamic pairing. While the minimum number of rounds recommended by the Swiss tournament design is ⌈log 2 6⌉ = 3 , we deliberately oversample slightly to reduce variance from early-stage stochasticity. To ensure both do-main robustness and fair comparison, each pairing competes across the same set of 30 pre-constructed Information Trees derived from diverse real-world websites (refer to Appendix F for detailed topic and domain distributions). 

Scoring Mechanism. Following competitive gaming standards (Elo and Sloan, 1978), we utilize the Elo rating system updated via the Bradley-Terry (BT) model (Bradley and Terry, 1952). Elo scores are dynamically updated after each round to guide the subsequent pairings, ensuring that models con-tinuously face opponents of comparable strength. 

4.2 Main Results: Alignment with Humans 

We evaluate the reliability of DR-Arena by bench-marking its derived rankings against the human-verified LMSYS Search Arena scores. 

Leaderboard Consistency. Table 3 presents the comparative rankings derived from DR-Arena and LMSYS Search Arena. DR-Arena achieves ap-proximate alignment with human judgment, recov-ering the exact hierarchy for most models. Figure 3 plots Elo scores derived from Search Arena against 27134 Model Search Arena DR-Arena Elo Rank Elo Rank                         

> GPT-5.1-Search 1201 11084 1
> Gemini-2.5-Pro-Grounding 1142 21054 2
> o3-Search 1139 31041 3
> Grok-4-Search 1138 4958 4
> Claude-Opus-4.1-Search 1130 5921 6 ( ↓)Perplexity-Sonar-Pro-High 1125 6942 5 ( ↑)

Table 3: Comparison between DR-Arena Leaderboard and LMSYS Search Arena. 950 1000 1050 1100 

DR-Arena Elo (Ours) 

> 1100
> 1120
> 1140
> 1160
> 1180
> 1200
> Search Arena Elo (Human GT)  GPT-5.1
> Gemini-2.5-Pro
> o3-Search
> Grok-4
> PPL-Sonar-Pro
> Claude-Opus-4.1
> Spearman = 0.94
> Pearson = 0.74

Figure 3: Leaderboard Correlation Analysis. 

those derived from DR-Arena. We observe a linear mapping, confirming that our automated metrics effectively proxy human preference. While the overall alignment is high, a minor rank swap occurs between Perplexity-Sonar-Pro (#5 in DR-Arena) and Claude-Opus-4.1 (#6). As detailed in Appendix G, this divergence could be an example of the Factuality-Fluency Trade-off :Our qualitative analysis reveals that the automated Examiner strictly penalizes hallucinated numbers that human annotators may overlook, being swayed by Claude’s superior writing style. 

Superiority over Static Benchmarks. We also calculate the correlation scores between LMSYS Search Arena and other benchmark datasets. Re-sults are shown in Table 4. We observe that DR-Arena achieves the SOTA Spearman correlation of 0.94, and a Pearson correlation of 0.74, sig-nificantly outperforming static datasets like Deep Research Bench (FutureSearch) and LiveResearch-Bench, which show negative correlations. Notably, among all benchmarks, DR-Arena is the only one that requires zero human intervention, automating the ground-truth generation via Dynamic Informa-tion Trees to assess factual correctness on the live web. We hypothesize that this high alignment with humans stems from our Dynamic Investigation pro-cess, which simulates the iterative nature of human                         

> Benchmark NPearson Spearman DR-Arena (Ours) 60.74 0.94
> BrowseComp (Wei et al., 2025) 50.70 0.76 DeepResearch Bench (Du et al., 2025) 40.63 0.40 LiveNewsBench (Zhang et al., 2026) 40.46 0.20 LiveSearchBench (Zhou et al., 2025) 4-0.23 -0.11 LiveResearchBench (Wang et al., 2025) 4-0.47 -0.63 Deep Research Bench (FutureSearch et al., 2025) 6-0.86 -0.90

Table 4: Comparison with SOTA Benchmarks. Ndenotes the number of models used for calculation. 

research, capturing nuances like error recovery and synthesis that static QA metrics could miss. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

To validate the design choices of DR-Arena, we conduct ablation studies focusing on three core components: tree-guided task generation, rubric-based judgments, and the evolvement loop.         

> Configuration Question Quality Rubric Accuracy Full Tree (Ours) 89.0% 88.0%
> No Logic Chain 2.0% 8.0% Flat Context 9.0% 4.0%

Table 5: Human Preference Rates on Task Generation. 

Tree-guided Task Generation. To verify the ef-fectiveness of Information Trees, we conduct a blind human study comparing tree-based task gen-eration against two ablation baselines: (1) Flat Con-text: Providing the Examiner with unstructured search snippets without topological edges. (2) No Logic Chain: Providing node content but withhold-ing ancestor context (the reasoning path). For 50 sampled cases, two expert annotators performed a blind three-way selection to choose the gener-ated question that best necessitated both Multi-hop Logic (Depth) and Multi-source Synthesis (Width) and the verification checklist that best captured the ground truth. Results are presented in Table 5. We observe that the full tree approach achieves the best performance, which has a selection rate of 89% for question generation and 88% for rubric construction. In contrast, the Flat Context base-line often degenerates into shallow factoid lookups, confirming that topological structure is essential for constructing valid deep research tasks. 

Rubric-Based Judgments. We evaluate the ad-judication mechanism by removing the generated Checklists and forcing the Examiner to judge based on internal knowledge and optional search. As 27135 Configuration Pearson Spearman DR-Arena (Full) 0.74 0.94       

> Impact of Adjudication
> w/o Rubric (Intuition Judge) 0.72 0.83
> Impact of Evolvement Loop
> w/o Evolvement (Round 1 only) 0.41 0.77 w/o Evolvement (Round 2 only) 0.68 0.94

Table 6: Ablation Results. Removing the rubrics or the evolvement loop significantly degrades alignment. 1 2 3

> Rounds Retained
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Correlation
> Pearson (Score)
> Spearman (Rank)

Figure 4: Evolution of Correlation across Rounds. 

shown in Table 6, the Spearman correlation drops from 0.94 to 0.83. When examining the mis-matched judgments closely, we see that, while the intuition-based judge can capture stylistic quality, it struggles to detect subtle hallucinations in synthe-sis. This demonstrates that Evidence-Based Adju-dication is critical for reducing judge hallucination and ensuring rigorous alignment with human stan-dards. 

The Evolvement Loop. We assess the impact of the multi-round dynamic investigation by cutting off investigation rounds early and present the re-sults in Table 6. The results derived solely from the First Round are insufficient, where Spearman correlation drops from 0.94 to 0.77, confirming that single-turn interactions fail to distinguish closely matched models, often resulting in ambiguous ties or noisy verdicts. By Round 2, the Spearman rank-ing correlation jumps to 0.94, demonstrating that the pressure test mechanisms are highly efficient at sorting agents into the correct hierarchy. The loop remains essential beyond this point, which we show with a more straightforward plot in Figure 4: The Pearson correlation, which measures the linearity of the score gaps, continues to improve from 0.68 to 0.74. This confirms that the subsequent rounds are important for calibrating the magnitude of the performance difference. 

Cross-Examiner Validation. To further examine whether the reliability of DR-Arena depends on       

> Judge Model Percent Agreement Cohen’s Kappa
> GPT-5.2-Chat 93.02% 0.901 Claude-Opus-4.6 88.70% 0.839

Table 7: Cross-Examiner Validation. Agreement rates between alternative Examiners and the original Exam-iner on 50 sampled matches.             

> Component Evaluation Criterion Result Task Generation Question Validity (Structure) 90.6% Rubric Factuality (Ground Truth) 89.1%
> Examiner Process
> Verdict Alignment (Cohen’s κ)0.91 Transition Logic Accuracy 96.9% Stop Condition Efficiency 92.2%
> Human Annotators Inter-Annotator Agreement (Cohen’s κ)0.88

Table 8: Human Audit Results. Expert annotators (N = 2 ) evaluated the quality of automated components across 30 randomly sampled matches (64 turns). 

a specific Examiner model, we conduct a Cross-Examiner validation experiment. We randomly sample 50 matches from the tournament logs and re-adjudicate them using two alternative frontier LLMs, GPT-5.2-Chat and Claude-Opus-4.6. We then compare their verdicts against the original adjudications produced by Gemini-3-Pro. As shown in Table 7, the alternative Examiners achieve high agreement with the original Exam-iner, with Percent Agreement rates of 93.02% and 88.70%, and Cohen’s Kappa scores of 0.901 and 0.839, respectively. These results indicate that DR-Arena’s judgments are highly consistent across di-verse frontier LLMs, suggesting that the evaluation signal is not primarily driven by the stylistic bias of a particular judge model. We hypothesize that this robustness stems from the structured nature of our framework: unlike fully open-ended judging, the Information Tree provides grounded rubrics that function as an explicit answer key, substantially reducing variance in the adjudication process. 

4.4 Validation via Human Study 

To validate the reliability of our automated compo-nents, we conduct a rigorous human study where two expert annotators audited a random sample of 30 full-match logs (covering 64 interaction turns). Detailed human study setups and interface demos are provided in Appendix H. During the study, we ask the annotators to evalu-ate the match quality while focusing on two aspects: task generation and Examiner judgment. The re-sults are summarized in Table 8, which strongly val-idate the quality of both the generation and adjudi-27136 50 100 150 

Skill Difference (Elo Gap) 

1.8 

2.0 

2.2 

2.4 

2.6 

2.8 

3.0      

> Avg. Investigation Rounds
> Claude vs GPT-5.1
> Claude vs o3
> Claude vs PPL
> Gemini vs GPT-5.1
> Gemini vs Grok
> Gemini vs o3
> Gemini vs PPL GPT-5.1 vs Grok
> GPT-5.1 vs o3
> Grok vs o3
> Grok vs PPL
> Linear Fit ( r=0.61, P= 0.045 )

Figure 5: Relationship between Skill Gap and Rounds. 

cation pipelines. First, regarding Task Generation, 90.6% of the generated questions are confirmed to strictly adhere to the Depth and Width principles and 89.1% of the rubrics are verified as factually correct based on the source URLs. Second, regard-ing the judgment process, the automated verdicts achieve substantial alignment with human experts’ judgments, yielding a Cohen’s Kappa agreement of 0.91. The two human annotators themselves achieve a Cohen’s Kappa agreement of 0.88 on ver-dict selection, indicating high inter-annotator con-sistency. Furthermore, the adaptive mechanism is proved to be highly reliable: 96.9% of the Evolve-ment Loop transitions correctly follow the diagnos-tic logic, and 92.2% of the matches are deemed to have stopped at an efficient round count. These findings validate the automated Examiner as a trust-worthy, scalable proxy for human adjudication. 

5 In-depth Analysis 

Beyond quantitative evaluation results, we also per-form in-depth analysis to examine the efficiency of the dynamic loop and the error distribution profiles of different models. Extended statistical diagnos-tics, including the aggregate distribution of verdicts and the structural diversity of the generated Infor-mation Trees, are detailed in Appendix I. 

5.1 Efficiency: The Skill Gap vs. Rounds 

To examine the hypothesis of DR-Arena where follow-up rounds make performance gaps more ap-parent, we analyze the relationship between skill difference (Elo Gap) and number of investigation rounds in Figure 5. We quantify the linear rela-tionship using the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) and assess statistical significance via the p-value. We observe a significant negative corre-GPT-5.1-S o3-Search Gemini-2.5 PPL-Sonar Grok-4 Claude-Opus              

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Failure Composition (%)
> 27%
> 19%
> 33% 37%
> 30% 31%
> 26%
> 30%
> 24%
> 26%
> 25% 25%
> 31% 33% 26%
> 28%
> 31% 27%
> 16% 17% 17%
> 9% 15% 17%
> Fail Rate
> 50.17%
> Fail Rate
> 56.48%
> Fail Rate
> 56.52%
> Fail Rate
> 60.19%
> Fail Rate
> 64.71%
> Fail Rate
> 66.82%
> Failure Type (Internal Composition)
> DEEP WIDE BOTH NONE

Figure 6: Per-Model Performance Profile. Models are ordered by their overall failure rates (at the top). 

lation ( r = −0.61 , p = 0 .045 ) between average investigation rounds and skill gap, validating that pairs with smaller skill gaps indeed require more investigation rounds. In the graph, we see that the system converges rapidly for high-divergence pairs; for instance, matches involving GPT-5.1-Search vs. 

Grok-4-Search (∆Elo ≈ 126 ) average fewer than 2.0 rounds, as the stronger model quickly satisfies hard constraints while the weaker fails. Conversely, closely matched pairs such as Gemini-2.5-Pro vs. 

o3-Search (∆Elo ≈ 13 .5) extend to 2.8 rounds. In these scenarios, the system automatically detects and triggers the Pressure Test mechanism, escalat-ing complexity to force a fine-grained differentia-tion. Therefore, DR-Arena effectively functions as an efficient sorting algorithm, concentrating com-putational cost on the decision boundaries where it yields the highest information gain. Notable outliers provide further insights into model architectures. The matchup between GPT-5.1-Search and o3-Search exhibits the highest in-vestigation duration (3.07 rounds) despite a mod-erate Elo gap ( ∆Elo ≈ 44 ). We hypothesize this stems from Behavioral Homogeneity within the OpenAI family: Both models likely share similar data and reasoning answer patterns, which lead to more ties. The system then escalates difficulty with more rounds to uncover subtle differences in long-horizon synthesis capabilities, demonstrating that DR-Arena can distinguish even highly correlated models, albeit at higher computational cost. 

5.2 Error Distribution: Depth vs. Width 

To provide a closer look into each model’s perfor-mance profile, we show a dissection of failure types in Figure 6. We define the Failure Rate as the ratio of non-winning rounds (including losses and ties) to the total number of rounds each model partici-pated in. Ordering models by this metric reveals a clear robustness hierarchy, with GPT-5.1-Search 27137 demonstrating the highest stability with a minimum failure rate of 50.17%. Beyond aggregate rates, the normalized failure distribution exposes architectural trade-offs. GPT-5.1-Search exhibits symmetric errors (27% Depth, 26% Width), suggesting balanced capabilities with-out structural bottlenecks. In contrast, o3-Search 

shows asymmetry favoring logical deduction: de-spite higher total failures, it has the lowest D EPTH 

failure rate (19%), with limitations primarily in coverage breadth (W IDTH : 30%). Models like 

PPL-Sonar-Pro and Grok-4 display the inverse pat-tern, with failures skewed toward D EEP reasoning deficits (37% and 30% respectively), indicating ef-fective retrieval but inconsistent logical reasoning. The persistent B OTH failures ( ∼20-30%) across all models underscore the difficulty of simultaneously satisfying depth and width constraints. These pro-files reveal capability trade-offs beyond aggregate metrics, enabling targeted model improvements. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduce DR-Arena, a fully automated frame-work for evaluating DR agents in dynamic envi-ronments. Existing static benchmarks suffer from temporal misalignment, penalizing agents that re-trieve current information contradicting outdated ground truth. DR-Arena addresses this by con-structing real-time Information Trees synchronized with the live internet. Beyond timeliness, it trans-forms evaluation into an active stress test through Adaptive Evolvement, efficiently isolating perfor-mance boundaries and disentangling failures in log-ical deduction ( Depth ) from deficits in informa-tion aggregation ( Width ). Achieving 0.94 Spear-man correlation with human-verified leaderboards, DR-Arena offers a scalable, reliable alternative to costly manual evaluation for benchmarking next-generation autonomous research systems. 

Limitations 

While DR-Arena provides a scalable alternative to human annotation, we acknowledge several limita-tions inherent to the framework. First, although our cross-examiner validation shows strong agreement across different judge mod-els, DR-Arena still relies on a single Examiner in the main evaluation pipeline, so judge-specific pref-erences cannot be fully ruled out. Second, when the generated ground-truth rubrics conflict with the Examiner’s internal parametric knowledge, there arises a risk that a judge could override the provided rubrics due to strong para-metric priors. In some cases, the judge could also successfully disregard a mistake in the generated list, as shown in Appendix G.3. Overall, the judge’s parametric knowledge conflicts remain a risk and future direction to explore. Third, because DR-Arena operates over the live web and depends on commercial search APIs, exact reproduction may be affected by temporal changes in indexing, ranking, geoblocking, and webpage availability. This creates a trade-off between eco-logical realism and fully controlled comparison: while we share the same fixed Information Trees across agents for fair evaluation, source prioriti-zation and search ranking may still disadvantage agents that rely on different but potentially more reliable sources. We reduce this risk by biasing tree construction toward high-reliability seed domains, while noting that fully freezing the search environ-ment would re-introduce contamination risks. Finally, although our evidence-based rubric cor-relates well with human preference on fact-heavy research tasks, it may undervalue creative synthe-sis or lateral thinking that deviates from the strict logical path of the generated tree. 

Acknowledgments 

This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation Singapore under the AI Singa-pore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG3-RPGV-2025-016). This research/project is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore un-der its AI Singapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-PhD-2021-01-001). 

References         

> Roshita Bhonsle, Rishav Dutta, Sneha Vavilapalli, Harsh Seth, Abubakarr Jaye, Yapei Chang, Mukund Rungta, Emmanuel Aboah Boateng, Sadid Hasan, Ehi Nosakhare, and Soundar Srinivasan. 2025. Auto-eval judge: Towards ageneral agentic frame-work for task completion evaluation. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.05508. Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika , 39(3-4):324– 345. Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2025. Deepresearch bench: A comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents.
> Preprint , arXiv:2506.11763.

27138 Yann Dubois, Balázs Galambosi, Percy Liang, and Tat-sunori B. Hashimoto. 2025. Length-controlled al-pacaeval: A simple way to debias automatic evalua-tors. Preprint , arXiv:2404.04475. Arpad E Elo and Sam Sloan. 1978. The Rating of Chess-players: Past and Present . Arco Publishing, New York. FutureSearch, Nikos I. Bosse, Jon Evans, Robert G. Gambee, Daniel Hnyk, Peter Mühlbacher, Lawrence Phillips, Dan Schwarz, and Jack Wildman. 2025. Deep research bench: Evaluating ai web research agents. Preprint , arXiv:2506.06287. Boyu Gou, Zanming Huang, Yuting Ning, Yu Gu, Michael Lin, Weijian Qi, Andrei Kopanev, Botao Yu, Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Yiheng Shu, Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Shijie Chen, Hanane Nour Moussa, Tianshu Zhang, Jian Xie, Yifei Li, Tianci Xue, Zeyi Liao, and 7 others. 2025. Mind2web 2: Evaluat-ing agentic search with agent-as-a-judge. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.21506. Jungo Kasai, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Yoichi Takahashi, Ronan Le Bras, Akari Asai, Xinyan Yu, Dragomir Radev, Noah A. Smith, Yejin Choi, and Kentaro Inui. 2023. Realtime QA: what’s the answer right now? In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 49025–49043. Curran Associates, Inc. Tian Lan, Bin Zhu, Qianghuai Jia, Junyang Ren, Haijun Li, Longyue Wang, Zhao Xu, Weihua Luo, and Kaifu Zhang. 2025. Deepwidesearch: Benchmarking depth and width in agentic information seeking. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.20168. Hongzhan Lin, Yang Deng, Yuxuan Gu, Wenxuan Zhang, Jing Ma, See-Kiong Ng, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2025. FACT-AUDIT: an adaptive multi-agent frame-work for dynamic fact-checking evaluation of large language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 360–381. Association for Computational Linguistics. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2024. GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Mihran Miroyan, Tsung-Han Wu, Logan King, Tianle Li, Jiayi Pan, Xinyan Hu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Anas-tasios N. Angelopoulos, Trevor Darrell, Narges Norouzi, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2026. Search arena: Analyzing search-augmented llms. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.05334. Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. 2022. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. 

Preprint , arXiv:2112.09332. OpenAI. 2025. Deep Research: Accomplish complex tasks with agentic analysis. https://openai.com /index/deep-research .Perplexity AI. 2025. Perplexity AI: Answer engine for complex queries. https://www.perplexity.ai/ hub/blog/introducing-perplexity-deep-res earch .Yujia Qin, Zihan Cai, Dian Jin, Lan Yan, Shihao Liang, Kunlun Zhu, Yankai Lin, Xu Han, Ning Ding, Huadong Wang, Ruobing Xie, Fanchao Qi, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Jie Zhou. 2023. Webcpm: Interactive web search for chinese long-form ques-tion answering. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8968–8988. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mathieu Ravaut, Bosheng Ding, Fangkai Jiao, Hailin Chen, Xingxuan Li, Ruochen Zhao, Chengwei Qin, Caiming Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. A comprehen-sive survey of contamination detection methods in large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2404.00699. Yijia Shao, Yucheng Jiang, Theodore A. Kanell, Peter Xu, Omar Khattab, and Monica S. Lam. 2024. As-sisting in writing wikipedia-like articles from scratch with large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Hu-man Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 6252–6278. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Tu Vu, Mohit Iyyer, Xuezhi Wang, Noah Constant, Jerry W. Wei, Jason Wei, Chris Tar, Yun-Hsuan Sung, Denny Zhou, Quoc V. Le, and Thang Luong. 2024. Freshllms: Refreshing large language models with search engine augmentation. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 13697–13720. Association for Computational Linguistics. Haiyuan Wan, Chen Yang, Junchi Yu, Meiqi Tu, Jiaxuan Lu, Di Yu, Jianbao Cao, Ben Gao, Jiaqing Xie, Aoran Wang, Wenlong Zhang, Philip Torr, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2026. Deep research arena: The first exam of llms’ research abilities via seminar-grounded tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 33341–33349. Jiayu Wang, Yifei Ming, Riya Dulepet, Qinglin Chen, Austin Xu, Zixuan Ke, Frederic Sala, Aws Albargh-outhi, Caiming Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. Livere-searchbench: A live benchmark for user-centric deep research in the wild. Preprint , arXiv:2510.14240. Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McK-inney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia 27139 Glaese. 2025. Browsecomp: A simple yet chal-lenging benchmark for browsing agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.12516. Colin White, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Arka Pal, Benjamin Feuer, Siddhartha Jain, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Neel Jain, Khalid Saifullah, Sreemanti Dey, Shubh-Agrawal, Sandeep Singh Sandha, Siddartha V. Naidu, Chinmay Hegde, Yann LeCun, Tom Goldstein, Willie Neiswanger, and Micah Goldblum. 2025. Livebench: A challenging, contamination-limited LLM bench-mark. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Ryan Wong, Jiawei Wang, Junjie Zhao, Li Chen, Yan Gao, Long Zhang, Xuan Zhou, Zuo Wang, Kai Xi-ang, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, Yang Wang, and Ke Wang. 2025. Widesearch: Benchmarking agentic broad info-seeking. Preprint , arXiv:2508.07999. Yunfan Zhang, Kathleen McKeown, and Smaranda Muresan. 2026. Livenewsbench: Evaluating llm web search capabilities with freshly curated news. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.13543. Ruochen Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Yew Ken Chia, Wei-wen Xu, Deli Zhao, and Lidong Bing. 2025. Auto-arena: Automating LLM evaluations with agent peer battles and committee discussions. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 4440–4463. Association for Computational Linguistics. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 46595–46623. Curran Associates, Inc. Heng Zhou, Ao Yu, Yuchen Fan, Jianing Shi, Li Kang, Hejia Geng, Yongting Zhang, Yutao Fan, Yuhao Wu, Tiancheng He, Yiran Qin, Lei Bai, and Zhenfei Yin. 2025. Livesearchbench: An automatically con-structed benchmark for retrieval and reasoning over dynamic knowledge. Preprint , arXiv:2511.01409. Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Gra-ham Neubig. 2024. Webarena: A realistic web en-vironment for building autonomous agents. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .27140 A Prompts and Configuration Settings 

To ensure reproducibility, we provide all prompt templates used in DR-Arena, including Automated Task Generation and Evidence-Based Judgment. In the templates below, dynamic content injected by the system at runtime is denoted by {{Blue Placeholders}}. 

A.1 Automated Task Generation 

The Examiner uses the following prompt to trans-form a raw Information Tree into a structured “Depth & Width” research task. The system dy-namically calculates word count constraints based on the tree depth and width. 

System Prompt: Task Generation 

# TASK: Generate a ‘‘Depth & Width’’ Search Evaluation Query You are an expert at creating complex, multi-hop search queries designed to test the limits of Search Agents. Your goal is to synthesize a question that requires Logical Reasoning (Depth) to identify the subjects and 

Broad Information Aggregation (Width) to answer fully. --- 1. THE HIDDEN KNOWLEDGE (Source Material) ---*Note: This content is hidden from the test taker. It is only for you to formulate the question and the grading criteria.* 

OVERALL DOMAIN/TOPIC : ‘‘{{Root Topic}}’’ 

A. Reasoning Chain (Background/Context) :{{Serialized Reasoning Nodes (Ancestors)}} 

B. Target Answers (The Facts to Retrieve) :{{Serialized Target Nodes (Siblings)}} --- 2. QUESTION GENERATION STEPS (READ CAREFULLY) ---

Rule 1: ABSOLUTE GROUNDING - CRITICAL 

- YOU MUST generate the question based ONLY 

on the specific entities and facts found in the [Hidden Knowledge] above. - STRICT PROHIBITION: Do NOT ignore the provided text. - Relevance : The question MUST be relevant to the Overall Domain/Topic (’’{{Root Topic}}’’). Do not hallucinate unrelated topics. 

Rule 2: COMPLETE DE-CONTEXTUALIZATION (No Leaking) 

- FORBIDDEN: You MUST NOT mention the specific filename, website title, directory name, or document header found in the source. - REQUIRED: Treat the provided text as just *one instance* of a universal fact. Ask about the *entities themselves*, not 

about the *document* describing them. - Litmus Test: If the user needs the specific JSON file you read to understand the question, YOU FAILED. The question must be solvable using Google/Bing to find the *original primary sources*. 

STEP 1: Deep Reasoning (The Filter) 

- Analyze the [Reasoning Chain] to identify the specific logic, condition, or category that groups the target entities together. - RULE : Do NOT mention the specific names of the [Target Entities] in the question. - RULE : Use the [Reasoning Chain] logic to strictly define the group. 

STEP 2: Wide Aggregation (The Scope) 

- If the [Target Answers] contain multiple entities, the question MUST require reading and comparing information from 

ALL of them. - The answer must not be resolvable by finding a single document; it must require aggregating details across all identified targets. 

STEP 3: Synthesis (The Depth & Width Question) 

- Combine Step 1 and Step 2 into a single, cohesive natural language question. - CRITICAL : Ensure the question targets 

Publicly Verifiable Facts . Do not ask about obscure details that exist *only* within the specific phrasing of the provided source text. The question must be answerable by searching external, general web sources. --- 3. CHECKLIST DEFINITIONS (CRITICAL) ---

STEP 1 Draft the Gold Standard Answer : Formulate a complete answer based on the [Hidden Knowledge]. 

STEP 2 Extract Checklists : Deconstruct the answer into specific verification points. - Checklist Width (Completeness & Details) : Content : The Specific Attributes/Facts requested in the query. Purpose : Once the entity is found, did the agent gather *all* the requested scattered details? - Checklist Depth (Identity & Logic) : Content : The Correct Entity Names + The Logic Validation. Purpose :Did the agent use the reasoning chain to find the *correct* person/thing? --- 4. OUTPUT FORMAT (JSON) ---Return the result in the following JSON format: {‘‘question’’: ‘‘The final Depth & Width search query’’, ‘‘word_limit_instruction’’: ‘‘{{Dynamic Constraint String}}’’, 27141 ‘‘checklist_width’’: [ ‘‘Specific Detail A for Entity 1’’, ‘‘Specific Detail B for Entity 1’’, ... ], ‘‘checklist_depth’’: [ ‘‘Target Entity 1 Name + Logic Proof’’, ... ], ‘‘rationale’’: ‘‘Briefly explain how the question uses logic to mask entities (Depth) and requests scattered info (Width).’’ }

A.2 Evidence-Based Judgment 

The Examiner acts as a Judge to evaluate two DR agents responses using the generated Rubrics. 

System Prompt: Judgment 

### Role: Super-User Evaluator (Simulating Human Preference) Compare Response A and Response B to identify which search agent provides a better USER EXPERIENCE. While accuracy is paramount, you must also heavily weigh comprehensiveness, formatting, and helpfulness -- traits that human users value in search engines like Perplexity, Gemini, or SearchGPT. --- 1. QUERY & CONSTRAINT ---Query: {{Question}} Constraint: Maximum {{Word Limit}} words . (Note: Do not penalize slightly going over if the quality is high. Only penalize extreme verbosity). --- 2. GROUND TRUTH CHECKLIST ---[WIDTH-Completeness]: {{Checklist Width JSON}} [DEPTH-Logic]: {{Checklist Depth JSON}} --- 3. RESPONSES ---=== Agent A === (Citation Count: {{Count A}}) {{Final Answer A}} === Agent B === (Citation Count: {{Count B}}) {{Final Answer B}} --- 4. EVALUATION CRITERIA (Aligned with Human Preference) ---

Dimension 1: Accuracy (The Foundation) 

- Core Entity Check : Determine if each agent passes the DEPTH Logic (Found the right entity?). (If BOTH fail this, it’s a LOW TIE). - Sub-Point Accuracy : Did the agent answer *all* parts of the prompt correctly? Determine if each agent passes the WIDTH Aggregation (Found the specific details?). 

- If BOTH agents have significant hallucinations (even on different parts), consider a Low Quality Tie .

Dimension 2: User Utility & Completeness (The Experience) 

- Helpfulness : Is the answer easy to read? Does it actually solve the user’s underlying intent? - Information Density : Unlike simple chatbots, Search Agents should provide rich context .- Helpful Recovery : If the exact answer isn’t in the context, did the agent try to synthesize *related* useful info? - Citation Density : A higher citation count is generally preferred as it indicates better groundedness. 

Dimension 3: Presentation & Structure 

- Markdown Mastery : REWARD the use of Bold 

headers, Bullet points, and Tables. - Scannability \& Directness : Can a user find the specific answer in 2 seconds? (BLUF - Bottom Line Up Front)? --- 4. SCORING RUBRIC ---- [[A/B_MUCH_BETTER]] (+2) :- The winner found the correct Entity AND answered sub-points correctly (No Hallucinations). - The loser failed the Depth Logic (Wrong Entity) or missed major Checklists. - *Note: Do not give MUCH_BETTER if the winner has a factual error in a sub-point.* - [[A/B_BETTER]] (+1) :If winner has errors, cap at BETTER. - The “Flawed Winner” : The winner got the Main Entity right, but missed a detail or hallucinated on a minor sub-point. The loser failed the Main Entity. - The “Style Winner” : Both are factually accurate, but one has significantly better formatting/comprehensiveness. - The “Nuance Winner” : Both failed slightly, but the winner’s failure was less catastrophic than the loser’s. - [[Tie]] :- *High Quality*: Both gave perfect, well-formatted, accurate answers. - *Low Quality*: Both failed to find the core entity or both hallucinated significantly. 

Error Diagnosis 

- If there is a loser, identify WHY they lost. - DEPTH : Failed logic/identity (Wrong Entity). - WIDTH : Failed detail aggregation (Missing Facts). 27142 - BOTH : Failed both depth logic and width details. - NONE : No hard checklist failures, when the winner won solely on Soft Filters like citations/formatting. --- 5. OUTPUT FORMAT (JSON) ---{‘‘verdict’’: ‘‘[[A_MUCH_BETTER]]’’ OR ‘‘[[A_BETTER]]’’ OR ‘‘[[Tie]]’’ ... , ‘‘tie_quality’’: ‘‘HIGH’’ OR ‘‘LOW’’ OR ‘‘N/A’’, ‘‘loser_failure_type’’: ‘‘DEPTH’’ OR ‘‘WIDTH’’ OR ‘‘BOTH’’ OR ‘‘NONE’’, ‘‘reasoning’’: ‘‘First, verify Depth Logic for both. Then, compare Width/Completeness...’’ }

B Example Generated Tasks 

This section presents five diverse examples of “Depth & Width” research tasks generated by the Examiner. These examples demonstrate the sys-tem’s ability to construct complex queries requiring multi-hop reasoning (Depth) and broad information aggregation (Width) across different domains. 

Example 1: Local Business Structure Analysis 

[QUESTION] 

Locate the gymnastics organization in the New York/New Jersey area that structures its competitive teams into three specific tiers: an in-house ’Club Team’ that competes exclusively against the organization’s other branches, a ’USA-IGC’ program capped at 3 training days per week to accommodate other sports, and a third high-performance program that explicitly prohibits athletes from participat-ing in other activities. Provide the name of this organiza-tion, the specific name of the high-performance program, and a list of all the cities where they currently operate gyms. 

[CHECKLIST / GRADING KEY] Entities to find : Target Entity: Gold Medal Gymnastics 

(or GMGC / Gold Medal Gymnastics & Ninja). 

Logic Proof : Identified via the unique combination of an internal-only ’Club Team’ and a ’Junior Olympic’ program that prohibits other sports. 

Specific Details :• High-Performance Program Name: Junior Olympic Program (or Junior Olympic Team) • City 1: Centereach • City 2: Garden City • City 3: Huntington • City 4: Levittown • City 5: Rocky Point • City 6: Short Hills • City 7: Smithtown 

Example 2: Cross-Domain Synthesis (Marketing & Labor Stats) 

[QUESTION] 

Locate the analysis by ’Marketing Eye Atlanta’ regarding a viral charity campaign that involved a ’bucket of iced water’ and the participation of ’the most feared woman in fashion.’ Identify the campaign and list the five specific elements cited that made it go viral. Then, identifying the specific occupation defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) as professionals who ’create and main-tain a positive public image for the clients they represent,’ provide the following data points from the 2024 occu-pational profile: the 2024 median annual pay, the job outlook percentage for the 2024–34 decade, and the pro-jected numeric employment change for that same period. 

[CHECKLIST / GRADING KEY] Entities to find : Target Entity 1: ALS Ice Bucket Chal-lenge (identified via Marketing Eye Atlanta & Anna Win-tour clue), Target Entity 2: Public Relations Specialists 

(identified via job description match). 

Specific Details :• Element 1: Emotional AND logical appeal • Element 2: Celebrity certification • Element 3: Amusement 27143 • Element 4: Simplicity • Element 5: Shareability • 2024 Median Annual Pay: $69,780 

• Job Outlook (2024–34): 5% (Faster than average) • Employment Change (2024–34): 15,000 

Example 3: Tech Policy & International Specifi-cations 

[QUESTION] 

Analyze the language support specifications for the ’Live Translation’ feature powered by Apple Intelligence as detailed in the user guide covering macOS Tahoe and iOS 26. Determine which three languages are explicitly compatible with Live Translation in the Messages app but are not listed as supported for Live Translation in Phone and FaceTime calls. Following this, consult the terms and conditions for the Apple Store Singapore to find the specific return policy for products purchased in volume (defined as an aggregate of more than four items). Provide the names of the three distinct languages, the number of days allowed for a volume return, and the restocking fee percentage charged. 

[CHECKLIST / GRADING KEY] Entities to find : Target Entity: Apple Intelligence Live Translation (Logic: Compare Messages support list vs. Phone/FaceTime support list), Target Entity: Apple Store Singapore Policy (Logic: Identify specific terms for ’re-turned in volume’ > 4 items). 

Specific Details :• Language 1: Dutch 

• Language 2: Turkish 

• Language 3: Vietnamese 

• Volume Return Deadline: 7 days 

• Volume Restocking Fee: 25% 

Example 4: Medical Service Scope & Pricing 

[QUESTION] 

Investigate the remote medical second opinion service operated by the joint venture between Cleveland Clinic and Amwell. Provide a detailed breakdown of its geo-graphic scope by listing the U.S. states eligible for the full ’Concierge Plus’ virtual visit, those restricted to the writ-ten report only, and the specific states where the service is unavailable. Additionally, report the service costs for U.S. patients versus international patients, and enumerate the specific countries where the international service is prohibited. 

[CHECKLIST / GRADING KEY] Entities to find : Target Entity: Virtual Second Opinions (VSO) by ’The Clinic’ (Cleveland Clinic & Amwell Joint Venture). 

Specific Details :• Identifies ’Concierge Plus’ (Virtual Visit) states: Ariz., Calif., Colo., Conn., Fla., Ga., Ill., Ind., Ky., Mich., N.C., N.J., N.Y., Ohio, Pa., S.C., Tenn., Texas, Va., Wisc., W.V. • Identifies ’Written Report Only’ states: Alaska, Ala., Ark., D.C., Del., Hawaii, Iowa, Idaho, Kan., La., Mass., Md., Minn., Mo., Miss., Mont., N.D., Neb., N.H., N.M., Nev., Okla., Ore., Utah, Vt., Wash., Wyo. • Identifies Excluded U.S. states: Maine, Rhode Island (R.I.), South Dakota (S.D.) 

• States U.S. Pricing: $1,690 (Report only) and $1,990 

(Report + Virtual Visit) 

• States International Pricing: $4,500 USD 

• Lists Excluded Countries: Australia, China, Germany, Denmark, Greece, Iran, North Korea, South Korea, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Russian Federation, Sweden, Turkey 

Example 5: Cultural Analysis (Music History) 

[QUESTION] 

In a 1988 review by Steve Pond (RS 537), two distinct Los Angeles-bred acts were compared: one described as an “unprolific” artist making “immaculate pop mu-sic” with lushness borrowed from soundtracks, and the other a “young and restless” band labeled the “true heir to Led Zeppelin” but stripped of “fairy-tale whimsy.” De-spite their differences, the reviewer noted that both artists’ respective albums from that year were populated by “rec-ognizable, real people.” Identify these two acts and their corresponding albums. Then, based on the specific de-scriptions in the review, list the following tracks: for the band, the two songs characterized as “hard-boiled riff rockers” and the acoustic song deemed a “worthy Left Coast successor to Walk on the Wild Side”; for the songwriter, the two songs presenting “bucolic views of a childhood in New Orleans,” the two “naive, devoted love songs,” and the final track described as a “chilling, coldblooded moment” involving a message to his son. 

[CHECKLIST / GRADING KEY] Entities to find : Band: Jane’s Addiction (Album: Noth-ing’s Shocking), Songwriter: Randy Newman (Album: Land of Dreams). Logic Proof : Validates the “heir to Led Zeppelin” vs “immaculate pop” comparison from the 1988 Steve Pond review. 

Specific Details :• Band Song (Hard-boiled): “Had a Dad” • Band Song (Hard-boiled): “Standing in the Shower... Thinking” • Band Song (Successor): “Jane Says” • Songwriter Song (Bucolic): “Dixie Flyer” • Songwriter Song (Bucolic): “New Orleans Wins the War” • Songwriter Song (Love): “Falling in Love” • Songwriter Song (Love): “Something Special” • Songwriter Song (Chilling): “I Want You to Hurt Like I Do” 27144 C Algorithm of Evolvement Loop 

The core logic of the DR-Arena Dynamic Inves-tigation is detailed in Algorithm 1. The system manages the state of the Information Tree T , the current path P (representing Depth), and the width constraint W .

Algorithm 1 DR-Arena Adaptive Evolvement Loop 

Require: Information Tree T , Agents MA, M B , Examiner 

E

Ensure: Final Verdict V and Scores SA, S B

1: Initialize: Path P ← RandomStart (T ), Width W ← 2

2: Initialize: Scores SA ← 0, S B ← 0

3: while |SA − SB | < Threshold and Rounds < Max do 

// Phase 1: Environment Check & Expansion 

4: if |Siblings (P )| < W then 

5: T ← Crawler.ExpandWidth (P, target = W )

6: end if 

// Phase 2: Context Extraction & Task Generation 

7: Cdepth ← Ancestors (P )

8: Cwidth ← Siblings (P, limit = W )

9: Q, R ← E. Generate (Cdepth , C width ) ▷ Gen. Question & Rubric 

// Phase 3: Agent Execution & Adjudication 

10: T raj A ← MA(Q); T raj B ← MB (Q)

11: V, F type ← E. Judge (T raj A, T raj B , R)

12: Update SA, S B based on V

// Phase 4: Adaptive State Transition 

13: if V is T IE then 

14: if V is L OW _Q UALITY then ▷ Both Hallucinated 15: P ← Parent (P ) ▷ Backtrack 

16: W ← max(2 , W − 1) 

17: else ▷ High Quality Tie 18: W ← W + 1 ▷ Pressure Test 

19: ATTEMPT DESCEND 

20: end if 

21: else ▷ Winner Decided 22: if Ftype is D EPTH then ▷ Logic Failure 23: ATTEMPT DESCEND 

24: else if Ftype is W IDTH then ▷ Coverage Failure 25: W ← W + 1 

26: else ▷ Ambiguous Failure 27: W ← W + 1 ; ATTEMPT DESCEND 

28: end if 

29: end if 

30: end while 

31: procedure ATTEMPT DESCEND 

32: if P is Leaf Node then 

33: T ← Crawler.ExpandDepth (P )

34: end if 

35: if P has Children then 

36: P ← P + RandomChild (P )

37: end if 

38: end procedure 

D Full Match Walkthrough 

To illustrate the dynamic nature of the DR-Arena, we present a complete 5-round match trace be-tween Agent A (Perplexity-Sonar-Pro) and Agent B (Claude-Opus-4.1). This match, centered on the topic of “Hand-held Game Consoles,” demonstrates the Adaptive Evolvement mechanism: as agents succeed, the system increases complexity (Depth/Width); when they fail, the system targets their specific weak-nesses. The match concludes via the Mercy Rule 

when Agent B establishes a decisive lead. 

Match Trace: Handheld Game Consoles (Rounds 1-5) 

Match Metadata Topic : Handheld game console 

Agents : Agent A (Perplexity-Sonar-Pro) vs. Agent B (Claude-Opus-4.1-Search) 

Final Result : Agent B Wins (Score 5.0 vs 2.0) 

=== ROUND 1 (Initialization) === State : Depth 2 | Width 2 

Question : Identify the two handheld game consoles re-leased in the 1990s that were uniquely designed to play the exact same physical game media as their manufac-turer’s home console counterparts. Provide launch price, battery count, and battery life. 

Agent A Response : Correctly identified NEC TurboEx-press and Sega Nomad . Used bullet points for Price ($249.99/$179.99), Batteries (6 AA), and Life ( 3 hrs). 

Agent B Response : Correctly identified the same entities and data, but used narrative paragraphs. 

Verdict : [[A_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent A is the winner based on Dimension 3 (Presentation). By using bullet points... Agent A made the answer immediately scannable... Agent B provided the same info but buried it within narrative paragraphs.” 

Evolution : Winner is A → Action: Pressure Test (Depth+1 & Width+1) === ROUND 2 (Complexity Increase) === State : Depth 2 | Width 3 

Question : Identify the 8-bit handheld (1989) that suc-ceeded ’Game & Watch’ and included Tetris . Contrast battery specs against Atari Lynx and Sega Game Gear. 

Agent A Response : Identified Game Boy. Estimated battery life as “10-15 hours” based on early specs. Used placeholders for citations. 

Agent B Response : Identified Game Boy. Estimated battery life as “15-35 hours” (closer to retrospective con-sensus). Provided valid URL citations. 

Verdict : [[B_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent B wins based on Content Accu-racy. The prompt asked for ’retrospective comparisons’... Agent B correctly captures the legendary efficiency (30+ hours) vs competitors... Agent A provided a conservative estimate.” 

Evolution : Winner is B → Loser Failure: WIDE →

Action: Wide+1 (Increase Context Width) === ROUND 3 (Technical Detail Test) === State : Depth 2 | Width 4 27145 Question : Identify three commercial color handhelds (1989-1991). Provide Price, CPU Architecture, and Bat-tery Count. 

Agent A Response : Identified Lynx, Game Gear, Tur-boExpress. Correctly identified Lynx CPU as 8-bit (6502 derivative) . Excellent formatting. 

Agent B Response : Identified same units. Incorrectly stated Lynx CPU was “16-bit 65SC02” .

Verdict : [[A_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent A wins on Technical Accuracy... Agent A correctly identified the Atari Lynx CPU as an 8-bit 6502 derivative. Agent B incorrectly stated it was a 16-bit processor (a common misconception).” 

Evolution : Winner is A → Action: Pressure Test === ROUND 4 (Differentiation Test) === State : Depth 2 | Width 5 

Question : Identify the Game Boy’s two primary competi-tors (one 1989, one 1991). 

Agent A Response : Identified Competitors as Atari Lynx and NEC TurboExpress .

Agent B Response : Identified Competitors as Atari Lynx 

and Sega Game Gear .

Verdict : [[B_MUCH_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent B correctly identified the Sega Game Gear as the primary competitor released in 1991... Agent A selected the NEC TurboExpress, which was a niche product and not a ’primary’ competitor comparable to the Game Gear’s market share.” 

Evolution : Winner is B → Loser Failure: WIDE →

Action: Wide+1 === ROUND 5 (The Final Blow) === State : Depth 2 | Width 6 

Question : Identify the dominant 8-bit console and its two main competitors (1989 & 1991). Compare battery re-quirements. Describe the 1996 ’Pocket’ revision changes. 

Agent A Response : Again identified NEC TurboEx-press as the main 1991 competitor. 

Agent B Response : Correctly identified Sega Game Gear . Provided detailed comparisons of battery life (Game Boy 30h vs Game Gear 3-5h). Correctly de-scribed Pocket revision (AAA batteries, true black & white screen). 

Verdict : [[B_MUCH_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent B correctly identified the ’Sega Game Gear’... Agent A incorrectly identified the ’NEC Tur-boExpress’. While the TurboExpress was released in 1991... it was not considered a ’main competitor’... The failure to identify the correct core entity is a critical logic failure.” 

— FINAL RESULT — Score : Agent A (2.0) vs. Agent B (5.0) 

Status : [GAME OVER] Mercy Rule Triggered (Diff 

≥ 2.0) Winner : Agent B (Claude-Opus-4.1-Search) 

E Benchmarks 

We compare DR-Arena against six recent bench-marks for evaluating DR search agents. BrowseC-omp (Wei et al., 2025) evaluates browsing and comprehension capabilities through curated web navigation tasks. DeepResearch Bench (Du et al., 2025) assesses multi-step research abilities with 100 PhD-level research tasks. LiveNewsBench 

(Zhang et al., 2026) and LiveSearchBench (Zhou et al., 2025) focus on real-time information re-trieval from news and search results respectively. 

LiveResearchBench (Wang et al., 2025) evalu-ates citation-grounded long-form reports with 100 expert-curated tasks. Finally, Deep Research Bench (FutureSearch et al., 2025) evaluates web search capabilities with 89 multi-step web research tasks and a “RetroSearch” environment with a large frozen set of scraped web pages. 

F Dataset Statistics 

We utilized a total of 30 Dynamic Information Trees constructed from Google Trends. The de-tailed distribution of these trees across different topics and web domains is summarized below. 

Table 9: Distribution of Source Domains. The system successfully extracted verifiable structures from various authoritative sources, with Wikipedia serving as a major hub. 

Source Domain Count 

en.wikipedia.org 8gamefaqs.gamespot.com 2my.clevelandclinic.org 2support.apple.com 1www.creativebloq.com 1www.nyfa.edu 1www.kff.org 1gmgc.com 1www.finduslawyers.org 1demographicestimation.iussp.org 1www.nimh.nih.gov 1www.bls.gov 1info-ee.surrey.ac.uk 1www.laterpress.com 1www.becomeaprocomposer.com 1www.hhhistory.com 1online.nwmissouri.edu 1everettcc.libguides.com 1calpoison.org 1www.uscourts.gov 1open.umn.edu 127146 Table 10: Distribution of Information Trees by Topic. The dataset covers a diverse range of high-level categories and specific sub-niches. 

Topic Hierarchy Tree Count 

Computers & Electronics > Software > Operating Systems 2Games > Computer & Video Games > Gaming Media & Reference 2Law & Government > Legal 2Arts & Entertainment > Movies > DVD & Video Shopping 1Arts & Entertainment > Online Media > Online Image Galleries 1Games > Computer & Video Games 1Health > Health Conditions > Respiratory Conditions 1Arts & Entertainment > Entertainment Industry > Film & TV Industry 1Law & Government > Public Safety > Public Health 1Sports > Individual Sports 1People & Society > Social Sciences 1Health > Mental Health > Learning & Developmental Disabilities 1Shopping > Apparel 1Shopping > Entertainment Media > DVD & Video Shopping 1Health > Vision Care 1Jobs & Education > Jobs 1Computers & Electronics > Consumer Electronics > Gadgets & Portable Electronics 1Arts & Entertainment > Music & Audio > Rock Music 1Books & Literature 1Online Communities 1Arts & Entertainment > Music & Audio > Music Equipment & Technology 1Online Communities > Dating & Personals 1Business & Industrial > Advertising & Marketing 1Beauty & Fitness 1Health > Public Health 1Law & Government > Government 1Sports > Team Sports 1

G Qualitative Analysis 

G.1 Case Study: The Factuality-Fluency Trade-off 

As noted in Section 4.2, a discrepancy exists be-tween human rankings (preferring Claude-Opus) and DR-Arena’s automated rankings (preferring Perplexity-Sonar). To investigate this, we con-ducted a qualitative analysis of the battle logs. The results suggest that this divergence stems from dif-fering evaluation priorities: the Automated Exam-iner enforces a strict penalty on “hallucinated de-tails,” whereas human crowds tend to prioritize response fluency and presentation. We illustrate this phenomenon using the match below. 

Scenario : The user requested a comparison of occupations with higher median wages than “Soft-ware Developers,” strictly based on the provided 

2024 Occupational Outlook Handbook (OOH) con-text. 

Match Trace: Factuality vs. Fluency 

— Ground Truth Context (Hidden) — 

• Software Developers Median Pay: $131,450 (2024 OOH). • Computer & Info Systems Managers: $171,200 .• Computer & Info Research Scientists: $140,910 .

— Agent A (Claude-Opus-4.1-Search) — 

Response Style: Narrative, Fluent, Analytical 

“According to the 2024 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics... Software Developers earn $130,160 [1]. Computer and Information Systems Managers significantly exceed the baseline with $169,510 median annual pay... Database Architects earn $134,700 annually...” 

— Agent B (Perplexity-Sonar-Pro) — 

Response Style: Structured, Data-Centric, Precise 

“According to the 2024 Occupational Outlook Handbook table... the median annual wage for Software Developers is $131,450 ... Only the following occupations have a higher median annual wage: • Computer and Information Systems Managers –

$171,200 ... • Computer and Information Research Scientists –

$140,910 ...” 

— Automated Adjudication — Verdict : [[B_MUCH_BETTER]] 

Reasoning : “Agent B’s numbers perfectly match the 27147 provided Ground Truth Checklist (e.g., Managers at $171,200). Agent A used outdated data from the pre-vious year (Managers at $169,510), leading to incorrect conclusions. Agent B also correctly interpreted the OOH occupational groupings...” 

Detailed Analysis. In this case, Agent A(Claude) produced a highly fluent response, em-ploying sophisticated phrasing such as “ signifi-cantly exceed the baseline ” and integrating an an-alytical narrative. A human evaluator, impressed by this stylistic polish and the inclusion of extra roles like “Database Architects,” might rate Agent A highly. However, the Automated Examiner correctly identified that Agent A’s fluency masked signifi-cant factual drifts. Specifically: 1. Data Hallucination/Drift : Agent A cited the median pay for Managers as $169,510 (likely 2023 data), differing from the strict 2024 con-text of $171,200 retrieved by Agent B. 2. Violating Negative Constraints : Agent A in-cluded “Database Architects,” which, while factually a high-paying role, violated the spe-cific grouping logic of the source text pro-vided in the context window. This case highlights that DR-Arena acts as a rig-orous “Factuality Auditor.” While humans may prioritize utility and style (favoring Claude), the Examiner’s rubric strictly penalizes hallucination in citation chains. This suggests that DR-Arena of-fers a complementary, and perhaps stricter, assess-ment of research reliability than unassisted human preference. 

G.2 Case Study: Judge Hallucination (Knowledge Conflict) 

While the Automated Examiner is generally robust, it can occasionally exhibit “Overconfidence” in its internal parametric knowledge, leading to incorrect overrides of valid Ground Truth. The following log demonstrates a specific failure mode where the Judge rejects a factually correct checklist regarding the GameFAQs “Best. Game. Ever.” contest due to a confusion between the 2005 and 2009 events. 

Failure Case: The Overconfident Judge 

— Ground Truth Checklist (Correct) — 

• 10th Anniversary (2005) Winner : Final Fantasy VII. • 10th Anniversary (2005) Opponent : Chrono Trigger. • 10th Anniversary (2005) Vote % : 52.9%. 

— Agent Performance — Agent A : Correctly identified Final Fantasy VII as the 2005 winner and Chrono Trigger as the opponent. 

Agent B : Incorrectly identified Ocarina of Time as the 2005 winner (confusing it with the 2009 contest). 

— Automated Adjudication (Hallucinated Error) — Verdict : [[B_BETTER]] (Incorrect) Judge’s Reasoning :“First, it is necessary to address a discrepancy in the pro-vided Ground Truth Checklist: The 10th Anniversary Contest (2005) was historically won by The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time , not Final Fantasy VII (which won the Spring 2004 contest). Both agents correctly iden-tified Ocarina of Time as the 2005 winner... Agent B is the winner because it provided a perfectly accurate account...” 

— Analysis — Error Type : Parametric Knowledge Conflict. 

Diagnosis : The Judge hallucinated that Ocarina of Time 

won the 2005 contest. In reality, Final Fantasy VII won the 10th Anniversary Top 10 vote in 2005. Ocarina of Time did not win until the “Best. Game. Ever.” tour-nament in 2009. The Judge used its internal (incorrect) memory to penalize the agent (Agent A) that was actually adhering to the historical truth. 

G.3 Case Study: Beneficial Judge Correction 

This case demonstrates the “Safety Net” capability of the Automated Examiner. Here, the Task Gen-eration module (based on the Information Tree) produced a factually incorrect checklist regarding the 2007 GameFAQs Character Battle. The Exam-iner utilized its parametric knowledge to identify the error in the Ground Truth and correctly judged the agents based on actual historical events. 

Success Case: The Correcting Judge 

— Generated Ground Truth (Flawed) — 

• Champion : L-Block (Tetris). • Runner-up : Link (The Legend of Zelda). <– FAC-TUAL ERROR in Generation 

— Agent Performance — Agent A (Gemini-2.5-Pro) : Incorrectly identified the runner-up as Master Chief .

Agent B (GPT-5.1-Search) : Correctly identified the runner-up as Cloud Strife and noted that “Link was elimi-nated in the semi-finals.” 

— Automated Adjudication (Correct Intervention) — Verdict : [[B_MUCH_BETTER]] (Correct) Judge’s Reasoning :“Agent B correctly identified the champion (L-Block) and the actual runner-up (Cloud Strife)... Agent A failed the Depth Logic check... Note: The provided Ground Truth Checklist in the prompt lists ’Link’ as the runner-up. Historically, Link was eliminated in the semi-finals by L-Block, making Cloud Strife the true runner-up. Agent B is awarded the win for factual accuracy despite the discrepancy with the provided checklist. ”

— Analysis — Mechanism : The Judge detected a conflict between the 27148 provided Checklist (Link) and its internal training data (Cloud Strife). Unlike the hallucination case, here the internal data was correct. The Judge prioritized the his-torical truth over the flawed instruction, preventing a wrongful penalty against the accurate agent (Agent B). 

H Human Study Setup 

Annotator Demographics. We recruited two an-notators for this study. Both annotators are current bachelor’s students in Computer Science with a fo-cus on Natural Language Processing (NLP). They possess native-level proficiency in English to en-sure high-quality assessment of the generated text’s fluency and nuance. Prior to the official annotation, the annotators underwent a training session involv-ing 5 trial cases to strictly align their understanding with our evaluation rubrics. 

Compensation and Ethics. Participants were compensated under the university’s Student Helper Scheme, adhering to the standard hourly rates which exceed the local minimum wage. We ob-tained informed consent from all participants prior to the study. No personally identifiable information (PII) was collected during the annotation process. 

Experiment I: Information Tree Ablation (Pref-erence Study). This study corresponds to the re-sults in Table 5. • Dataset: We randomly sampled 50 cases from the test set. • Task: For each case, annotators were presented with outputs from three configurations ( Full Tree, Flat Context, No Logic Chain ) in a blinded, ran-domized order to prevent bias. • Criteria: Annotators performed a forced-choice comparison to select the single best configuration based on two dimensions: 1. Question Quality: Which generated ques-tion best necessitates multi-hop reasoning and multi-source synthesis? 2. Rubric Accuracy: Which verification checklist best captures the ground truth con-straints without hallucination? 

Experiment II: Pipeline Validation Audit (Re-liability Study). This study corresponds to the results in Table 8. • Dataset: We randomly sampled 30 full-match logs, comprising a total of 64 interaction turns. • Task: Annotators were provided with the full context, including the Information Tree, gener-ated tasks, model responses, and the Examiner’s automated logs. 27149 • Criteria: They audited the pipeline across five specific metrics using a binary Pass/Fail scale (for objective correctness) and Likert scale (for alignment): 1. Question Validity: Does the question struc-turally adhere to the “Depth & Width” defi-nition? 2. Rubric Factuality: Are the evaluation checkpoints supported by the source URLs? 3. Verdict Alignment: Do the annotators agree with the Examiner’s Win/Loss/Tie de-cision? (Used to calculate Cohen’s Kappa). 4. Transition Logic: Did the Evolvement Loop correctly identify whether to deepen or widen the search based on the previous turn? 5. Stop Condition: Did the match conclude at an efficient point without redundant rounds? 

H.1 Annotation Instruments 

Below, we provide the exact questionnaires and criteria presented to the annotators for both the Task Generation Preference Study (Experiment I) and the Pipeline Validation Audit (Experiment II). 

Instrument I: Task Generation Preference. In this experiment, annotators were presented with three candidate options (Full Tree, Flat Context, No Logic Chain) in a randomized order. They were asked to vote for the best design based on the “Depth & Width” criteria. 

Survey: AI Question Quality Assessment 

— EVALUATION CRITERIA — CRITERIA 1: THE QUESTION (Depth & Width) 

Which question is better designed to test the limits of an intelligent agent? • Depth (Logic) : Does it hide entity names and require reasoning paths? (e.g., “Who is the person that...” vs 

“Who is Steve Jobs?” )• Width (Coverage) : Does it require aggregating infor-mation about multiple entities? 

CRITERIA 2: THE CHECKLIST (The ’Teacher Test’) 

Imagine you are a teacher grading an exam using this checklist as the Answer Key. • Logic Verification : Does it explain why an entity is the answer? • Precision : Does it contain specific numbers/details rather than vague summaries? 

— EXAMPLE CASE (Candidate Options) — [OPTION 1] (Flat Context Baseline) [QUESTION] Based on the provided text, describe the recent moves by major technology companies regarding the resale of digital goods... identify the historical legisla-tion cited as the first copyright law. 

[CHECKLIST] 

• Entities to find: Amazon, Apple, Costco, Omega, Statute of Anne. • Specific Details: Amazon has obtained a patent... The first copyright law was the Statute of Anne (1710)... 

[OPTION 2] (No Logic Chain Baseline) [QUESTION] In the context of the 2013 discussions... which two major technology companies were reported to have sought patents... use the comparison of ’Fifty Shades of Grey’. 

[CHECKLIST] 

• Entities to find: Amazon, Apple. • Specific Details: Amazon obtained a patent... Apple applied for a patent... 

[OPTION 3] (Full Tree - Ours) [QUESTION] Identify the Massachusetts-based startup that was sued by Capitol Records in 2013... as well as the two major technology giants... For the startup, explain the specific restriction imposed... contrast the technical mechanisms... 

[CHECKLIST] 

• Entities to find: ReDigi (Identified via MA location, lawsuit...), Amazon (Identified via e-commerce...), Ap-ple (Identified via electronics...), Scott Turow .• Specific Details: Startup Restriction: Funds must be spent on purchasing new songs... Amazon Mechanism: Personalized ’data store’... Apple Mechanism: Trans-ferring files without reproduction... 

— YOUR TASK — 

1. Which Option has the BEST QUESTION design (Depth & Width)? 

(Look for logic depth/hidden entities and multi-entity comparison) 

□ Option 1 □ Option 2 □ Option 3 2. Which CHECKLIST is the best “Answer Key” for grading? 

(Which list is most precise and allows for objective logic verification?) 

□ Option 1 □ Option 2 □ Option 3 

Instrument II: Pipeline Validation Audit. In this experiment, expert annotators audited the full lifecycle of a match. They validated the correct-ness of the questions, the factual accuracy of the checklists, and the reliability of the automated Ex-aminer’s verdicts. 

Survey: Deep-Arena Pipeline Audit 

— PART A: Question Validation — A1. [Depth Validation] Does the CURRENT question require Multi-hop reasoning (hiding entities)? 

□ Yes (Valid Depth) 

□ No (Single-hop/Direct Lookup) 

□ Broken Question 

A2. [Width Validation] Does the CURRENT question require Aggregating multiple distinct info points? 

□ Yes (Valid Width) 

□ No (Narrow/Single point) 

□ Broken Question 

A3. [Evolution Check] Compare Previous vs. Current Question. Did the question actually change in difficulty/s-cope as planned (e.g., Depth+1 / Wide+1)? 

□ Yes, successful evolution. 27150 □ No, failed to change as intended.                  

> — PART B: Factuality Check — B1. Is the Checklist above FACTUALLY correct?
> (Verify specific claims, dates, names via Google if neces-sary)
> □Completely Factually Correct
> □Mostly Correct (Minor Inaccuracies)
> □Contains Major Hallucinations/Falsehoods
> — PART C & D: Verdict & System Review — C1. Human Verdict: Which answer is better?
> □Agent A Much Better □Agent A Better □Tie
> □Agent B Better □Agent B Much Better
> D1. Do you agree with the Automated Judge’s verdict?
> □Yes (Agree) □No (Disagree)
> D2. Rounds Sufficiency
> Do we have enough evidence to distinguish the capability difference?
> □Sufficient (Difference is clear / Topic exhausted)
> □Insufficient (Agents are too close / Need harder task)
> □Excessive (Should have stopped earlier)

I Detailed Dataset Diagnostics 

This section provides a macro-level statistical anal-ysis of the full tournament dataset, covering 789 unique interaction rounds. 

I.1 Verdict and Failure Distribution 

We first examine the distribution of adjudication outcomes and failure modes, as visualized in Figure 7. The left panel illustrates the distribution of Judge Verdicts. The data reveals that “Better” (49.9%) is the most frequent outcome, significantly outnum-bering “Much Better” (32.8%). This indicates that while capability gaps exist, top-tier agents often differentiate themselves through marginal improve-ments in utility or completeness rather than catas-trophic failures of their opponents. The right panel breaks down the specific rea-sons for defeat. The distribution is remarkably balanced between D EPTH (Logic Failure, 32.3%) and W IDTH (Coverage Failure, 30.0%). This bal-ance validates the effectiveness of our “Depth & Width” task generation strategy, confirming that the framework successfully exerts equal pressure on both the reasoning capabilities and the information aggregation spans of the agents. 

I.2 Topological Complexity 

To understand the complexity required to distin-guish these models, we analyze the structural prop-erties of the Information Trees at the exact moment a verdict was reached. Figure 8 presents the his-tograms for Tree Depth and Width Constraints. • Search Tree Depth : This metric represents the length of the reasoning chain required to identify the target entity. While the distribu-tion peaks at Depth 2 (representing standard multi-hop queries), it exhibits a long tail ex-tending up to Depth 8. This confirms the sys-tem’s ability to dynamically generate long-horizon deduction tasks when agents enter a stalemate. • Width Constraint : This metric represents the number of sibling information units required for aggregation. The distribution shows signif-icant variance, with a notable portion of tasks requiring the synthesis of 4 to 7 distinct data points, effectively testing the agents’ context window management and retrieval recall. 27151 Much Better Better Tie     

> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> 500
> Round Count
> 32.8%
> 49.9%
> 17.2%
> High Qual: 0.7%
> Low Qual: 99.3%
> Low Qual.
> High Qual.
> DEEP WIDE BOTH NONE
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> Round Count
> 32.3%
> 30.0%
> 19.5% 18.1%

Figure 7: Macro-level Evaluation Diagnostics. The left panel displays the distribution of verdicts across 789 unique rounds. The right panel shows the distribution of identified failure types for the losing agents. 1 2 3 4 5 6 8

Search Tree Depth        

> 10 1
> 10 2
> Count (Log Scale)
> 234567811

Width Constraint 

> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Count (Log Scale)

Figure 8: Information Trees Topology Distribution. Histograms showing the Search Tree Depth and Width Constraints of the active nodes at the conclusion of all evaluation matches. Note the Log Scale on the Y-axis, indicating that while most tasks conclude at moderate complexity, the system is capable of scaling to high-complexity configurations. 27152