Title: 2026.findings-acl.783.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.findings-acl.783.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 02:31:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , pages 15957–15970 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Tree-Notebook: A Context-Aware Agent with Tree Search and Entropy-Aware Data Shadow for Interactive Data Science 

## Junkun Qiu, Min Huang, Qinghai Miao *

## School of Artificial Intelligence University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 

## qiujunkun24@mails.ucas.ac.cn {huangm, miaoqh}@ucas.ac.cn 

## Abstract 

While LLM-based agents have emerged as a focal point for automating data science tasks, they continue to grapple with inefficient con-text management, "silent failures" (where code executes correctly but fails the task objectives), and error propagation inherent in sequential generation. In this paper, we propose Tree-Notebook , an agentic framework designed to mimic the iterative cognitive process of human data scientists. At its core, Tree-Notebook con-ceptualizes Jupyter Notebook cells as nodes within a tree structure, facilitating organized and efficient context retrieval. We formalize the task-solving process as a Partially Observ-able Markov Decision Process (POMDP) over a dynamic tree, utilizing an entropy-based in-formation gain function for path evaluation to enhance adaptability in real-world environ-ments. Furthermore, we introduce the "Data Shadow" system, which resolves silent failures by performing real-time tracking of data distri-butions, provenance, and semantic constraints. Experimental results demonstrate that Tree-Notebook achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) per-formance on both InfiAgent-DABench and DS-Bench. To further evaluate robustness, we in-troduce an augmented version of InfiAgent-DABench to simulate complex environments, where Tree-Notebook consistently maintains its SOTA standing. Code is available at: https: //github.com/QJK-BUAA/Tree-Notebook 

## 1 Introduction 

Data science is an intricate discipline centered on extracting actionable insights from data, encom-passing a broad spectrum of tasks such as data preprocessing, aggregation, and modeling(Donoho, 2017; Zhang et al., 2024). Traditionally, Python-based programmatic manipulation has been the cor-nerstone of these workflows. However, driven by the rapid advancements in Large Language Models 

> *Corresponding author

(LLMs), the field is undergoing a transition toward an agentic paradigm, where LLM-powered agents autonomously synthesize code to execute complex data science tasks(Hong et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Xue et al., 2023; Dibia, 2023). AutoKaggle and DS-Agent established the foun-dation for full-lifecycle automation through multi-agent collaboration and Case-Based Reasoning (CBR)(Li et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024b). However, these systems often struggle with the non-linear exploration required in large search spaces. Sub-sequent works like Data Interpreter and Datawise Agent improve hierarchical planning but remain "data-decoupled," creating a gap between planning and actual data states(Hong et al., 2025; You et al., 2025). While JUPITER introduces inference-time search, it prioritizes code logic over the data-driven adjustments essential for complex DS pipelines(Li et al., 2025b). Synthesizing the above analysis and insights from recent surveys (Rahman et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b), we argue that current linear frameworks struggle to align with the exploratory and trial-and-error nature of real-world data sci-ence. We identify three critical misalignments: 

(1) The “Silent Failure” in State Tracking. Ex-isting agents suffer from state invisibility . They rely on textual outputs (stdout) but lack percep-tion of the underlying data distribution in the ker-nel. For instance, an operation like df.dropna() 

might silently discard 90% of the dataset. A linear agent, seeing no execution error, proceeds on com-promised data, leading to “silent failures” that tra-ditional text-based observations miss(Hong et al., 2025; Munkhdalai et al., 2024). (2) Rigidity in Non-Linear Exploration. Real-world tasks in-volve branching hypotheses (e.g., comparing impu-tation strategies). Linear frameworks force a single execution path. Once an agent commits to a sub-optimal feature engineering path, it often lacks the mechanism to cleanly backtrack to a historical state without polluting the context window(Guo et al., 

15957 2024b; Hassan et al., 2023).(3) Insufficiency of ex-isting benchmarks. Mainstream benchmarks are often too sanitized to expose these fragilities. In realistic workflows involving environmental noise (e.g., irrelevant files) or ambiguous schemas, lin-ear agents prone to hallucination fail to distinguish signal from noise, rendering simple evaluations insufficient(Hu et al., 2024; Jing et al., 2024). To address these limitations—specifically the risks of silent data corruption and the inability to recover from dead ends—we propose Tree-Notebook . This architecture formulates code gen-eration as a Partially Observable Markov Deci-sion Process (POMDP) over a tree structure(Janner et al., 2022; Weir et al., 2024). By treating Jupyter notebook cells as nodes, we replace error-prone linear planning with a non-linear dynamic search guided by entropy-regularized trajectory optimiza-tion(Wen et al., 2024; Vanlioglu, 2025). 

Key contributions include: (1) Entropy-Regularized POMDP Tree-Framework. We pro-pose Tree-Notebook, utilizing a dual-objective eval-uation of task utility and subjective semantic en-tropy to effectively balance exploration efficiency with execution risk in uncertain environments. (2) 

Data Shadow and Isomorphic Merging. To resolve state invisibility, we introduce the Data Shadow 

to track semantic data evolution (e.g., detecting silent data loss). Coupled with isomorphic merging, this compresses the search space into a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) by identifying observation-ally equivalent states. (3) Non-linear Backtrack-ing and Enhanced Benchmarking. We enable non-linear spatio-temporal backtracking using system checkpoints to perform state rollbacks, prevent-ing error propagation. Furthermore, we establish a noise-augmented InfiAgent-DABench with hier-archical perturbations (e.g., irrelevant files, data noise)(Mao et al., 2025; Siqueira de Cerqueira et al., 2024) to rigorously evaluate agent robust-ness in complex, realistic scenarios. In summary, we propose Tree-Notebook, aPOMDP-based framework that structures note-book execution as an optimized tree search using Data Shadow, alongside an enhanced InfiAgent-DABench tailored to realistic scenarios. Our ap-proach achieves SOTA performance on public benchmarks for data analysis and modeling, with robustness further validated via a noise-augmented dataset. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 LLM-Based Reasoning and Search 

While Chain-of-Thought (CoT) enhances LLM rea-soning, its reliance on linear greedy decoding lim-its error correction(Wei et al., 2022). To address this, non-linear architectures have emerged: Tree of Thoughts (ToT) introduces tree-based search for backtracking and state evaluation(Yao et al., 2023), while Graph of Thoughts (GoT) enables complex topologies via node aggregation and loop-ing(Besta et al., 2024). Building on these, RAP frames reasoning as planning, employing Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with a learned World Model to prune low-quality branches, achieving su-perior long-range reasoning compared to ToT(Hao et al., 2023). Search strategies are equally critical in code gen-eration. AlphaCode(Li et al., 2022) demonstrated the power of large-scale sampling, while Language Agent Tree Search (LATS) combines MCTS with compiler feedback to guide generation(Zhou et al., 2023). Similarly, Reflexion optimizes reasoning trajectories through linguistic reinforcement learn-ing based on past errors(Shinn et al., 2023). How-ever, these methods predominantly target closed domains (arithmetic, puzzles) with discrete, well-defined state spaces, lacking the capacity to per-ceive complex data states (e.g., variable distribu-tions) inherent in data science tasks(Aouini and Loubani, 2025). 

2.2 Evolution of Data Science Agents 

The evolution of DS agents has moved from sim-ple execution to complex orchestration. Early tools like PandasAI and ReAct-based agents(Yao et al., 2022) relied on linear "Think-Act-Observe" loops(Rahman et al., 2025). CodeAct later demon-strated that using executable code as a unified ac-tion space offers better generalization than JSON or text instructions(Guo et al., 2024a). However, these linear approaches often fail in long-horizon tasks due to a lack of global planning(Zhang et al., 2025a; Wang et al., 2025b). To handle complex workflows, recent frame-works adopt multi-agent and hierarchical strate-gies. AutoGen facilitates role-based collabora-tion(Wu et al., 2024), while MetaGPT encodes Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) into agent workflows to reduce hallucination(Hong et al., 2023). TaskWeaver(Qiao et al., 2023) and Data Interpreter(Hong et al., 2025) emphasize code-first 15958 Figure 1: The Tree-Notebook Workflow. The diagram illustrates the evolution from the root node ( s0) to the optimal path ( τ ∗). (1) Tree Growth : Semantic entropy ( h) triggers dynamic branching or atomic expansion, transforming linear reasoning into a multi-branch search tree. (2) Tree Restructuring : The topology is optimized via non-linear backtracking, pruning, and isomorphic merging to ensure convergence to high-completion nodes. 

planning and dynamic tool integration. Specific im-plementations like AutoKaggle(Li et al., 2024), Au-tomind(Ou et al., 2025), CAAFE(Hollmann et al., 2023), and InsightPilot(Ma et al., 2023) address distinct DS lifecycle stages. Despite new bench-marks like MLAgentBench(Huang et al., 2023; Bai et al., 2025) revealing limitations in authentic re-search tasks, most existing systems remain linear executors. They lack the ability to actively explore "data states" or perform counterfactual reasoning during execution(Zhang et al., 2026). 

2.3 Notebook and Search-Enhanced Agents 

Recognizing the exploratory nature of data science, research is shifting toward interactive Jupyter envi-ronments that persist memory state. OpenCodeIn-terpreter leverages execution feedback to iteratively refine code, proving the value of environmental in-teraction(Zheng et al., 2024). Jupybara(Wang et al., 2025c) introduces planning-verification mecha-nisms within notebooks(Wang et al., 2024), while Datawise Agent models tasks as Finite State Ma-chines (FST), achieving SOTA performance via active "Self-Debugging"(You et al., 2025). Most recently, JUPITER formalizes data analy-sis as a search problem, using MCTS and a trained Value Model to guide exploration in code space(Li et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025d), yet it only de-          

> Method Context Topo. Planning (Tracking)
> Datawise Agent Lin. Seq. FST (Text/Std) JUPITER Search Tree VG-MCTS (Text Traj.) Data Interp. Dyn. Graph Graph Ref. (Graph Mem.)
> Tree-Notebook Tree Cells E-POMDP (Data Shadow)

Table 1: Comparison with SOTA agents. Abbrevia-tions: Topo. : Topology; Lin. Seq. : Linear Sequence; 

Dyn. : Dynamic; Std : Stdout; VG : Value-Guided; Traj. :Trajectory; Ref. : Refinement; Mem. : Memory; E-POMDP : Entropy-POMDP. JUPITER uses trees only during search, not for context retention. Tree-Notebook 

uniquely structures the notebook as a tree to manage diverse exploration branches and employs E-POMDP for robust planning. 

ploys tree search for transient trajectory optimiza-tion. Moreover, while JUPITER relies primarily on textual feedback (e.g., error logs, stdout) to in-fer state, Tree-Notebook not only leverages struc-tured state projection to maintain deep semantic awareness of the underlying data (e.g., DataFrame transformations) but also fundamentally restruc-tures the interaction context into a persistent tree topology—enabling parallel experimental branches without context pollution(Li et al., 2025a), a critical edge over linear frameworks. 15959 3 Methodology 

We formalize the problem of automatic data science code generation in Tree-Notebook as an Entropy-Regularized Trajectory Optimization task within a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) framework. Unlike traditional linear code generation, we treat data science tasks as a navigation problem within a vast, dynamic latent state space. The core challenge in this scenario is 

State Invisibility : the LLM cannot directly perceive the full memory state of the DataFrames within the Python kernel. To address this perception bot-tleneck, our framework introduces a proxy obser-vation mechanism named “Data Shadow” and cir-cumvents execution risks by evaluating semantic entropy on a dynamic search tree. 

3.1 Problem Definition: Environment and State Space 

We define the interaction environment as a tuple 

⟨S , A, T, R, Ω, O⟩ . Specifically, S represents the set of latent physical states (memory snapshots), A

denotes the action space of executable code, and T :

S × A → S is the deterministic transition function governed by the Python interpreter. The reward function R evaluates the utility of transitions, while 

Ω represents the space of observations. Since the physical state is strictly invisible, the agent relies on the observation function O : S → Ω to perceive the environment. At time step t, the system resides in a latent physical state et ∈ S (i.e., the actual memory snap-shot). The agent cannot access et directly but re-ceives an observation ot = O(et) (Data Shadow) and maintains an observable state st (a node in the Notebook). This node st is defined as an en-riched encapsulation object designed for complex reasoning and backtracking: 

st = ( ct, r t, o t, Mt) (1) The components are defined as follows: ct (Ac-tion Code): The Python logical code unit gener-ated at the current step, constituting the agent’s action space ( at ≡ ct). rt (Execution Result): Di-rect feedback from the physical environment via transition T , including Stdout, Traceback, and a system checkpoint to support rollback operations. 

ot (Observation / Data Shadow): The critical bridge between the LLM and the physical envi-ronment, generated by O. Since the LLM’s con-text window cannot process raw large-scale tabular data, we inject a “Data Probe” after each execution. The probe extracts DataFrame meta-information (dimensions, schema semantics, type distribution, statistical summaries, and key slices) to reconstruct a lightweight state representation, ot. This serves as the sole evidence for the model to understand environmental transitions ( et → et+1 )(Zhao and Krishnan, 2025). Mt (Node Metrics): A tuple 

⟨vt, h t⟩ guiding the tree search policy. It comprises the Task Completion Score ( vt), which acts as the immediate reward (derived from R) quantifying how well ct satisfies user requirements, and the 

Subjective Semantic Entropy ( ht), which quanti-fies the model’s cognitive uncertainty regarding the logical plausibility of the current state (see Section 3.2). 

3.2 Optimization Objective Function 

The agent’s ultimate goal is to construct an op-timal trajectory τ ∗ = ( s0, s 1, . . . , s T ) within the search space T . To balance “efficient task pro-gression” and “risk avoidance,” we propose a Dual-Objective Evaluation Framework that maximizes the following compound utility function: 

τ ∗ = argmax   

> τ∈T |τ|

∑

> t=0

vt(st)

︸ ︷︷ ︸ 

> Utility

−λ · ht(st)

︸ ︷︷ ︸ 

> Uncertainty

 (2) Here, vt(st) represents the utility gain of the cur-rent state, while λ · ht(st) acts as a regularization term penalizing high-risk uncertainty (Sun et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a). λ is a hyperparameter controlling the agent’s risk aversion (Zhang et al., 2025a; Wang et al., 2025b). 

Task Utility Definition ( vt) and Convergence. 

The Task Completion Score ( vt) serves as the pri-mary driver for trajectory optimization. We define 

vt ∈ [0 , 1] as a normalized probability score es-timated by the Evaluator LLM E, measuring the alignment between the current observable state st

and the User Goal U:

vt(st) = Iexec · PE (success | U , o t, r t) (3) where Iexec ∈ { 0, 1} is an indicator function that is 1 if the code executes without fatal errors and 

0 otherwise. The definition of success varies by task type: For Data Analysis QA (e.g., InfiAgent-DABench): vt measures Answer Confidence . The Evaluator checks if the final output in rt strictly fol-lows the required format and logically answers the 15960 query U based on the data profile in ot. If a direct answer match is found, vt → 1. For Data Mod-eling (e.g., DSBench): Since final model metrics are unknown during intermediate steps, vt mea-sures Process Completeness . We decompose the pipeline into milestones (e.g., Data Loading →

Cleaning → Feature Engineering → Model Train-ing). vt is assigned incrementally (e.g., 0.2, 0.5, 0.9) as the agent successfully generates valid ar-tifacts corresponding to these milestones. Termi-nation Criteria: In Algorithm 1, the threshold 

τsuccess acts as a confidence gate (set to 0.95). When 

vt(st) > τ success , the agent deems the current tra-jectory optimal and terminates the search early. 

Computation of Subjective Semantic Entropy (ht). Traditional code generation focuses on syn-tactic correctness. However, in data science, code may run without errors yet violate semantic in-tegrity (Kuhn et al., 2023) (e.g., erroneously drop-ping key columns). To quantify the risk of such “implicit hallucinations,” we introduce an indepen-dent LLM Evaluator as a second-order observer. Utilizing the same backbone model as the main workflow, the Evaluator is prompted to output con-fidence scores within the range [0 , 1] for three di-mensions. Based on the input ⟨U , c t, o t⟩, these scores constitute a probability distribution P over three mutually exclusive semantic categories: Ef-fective (y1, logical convergence), Ineffective (y2,no substantive change), and Destructive (y3, infor-mation loss). The subjective semantic entropy is calculated via the Shannon entropy formula: 

ht(st) = −

> 3

∑

> i=1

P (yi) log P (yi) (4) 

Physical Interpretation: Low entropy indicates high system confidence. Note that if the system is certain the action is destructive ( P (y3) ≈ 1), the node is discarded due to low vt. High entropy implies ambiguity regarding the consequences, trig-gering defensive branching search strategies via the penalty term λ.

3.3 Information-Theoretic Dynamic Tree Search 

We model the inference process as an iterative ex-pansion on a state space graph G = ( V, E). Unlike static graph search, our structure is an “Evolution-ary Tree” that grows dynamically based on infor-mation gain and physical feedback(Farquhar et al., 2024; Nguyen et al., 2025). 

3.3.1 Initialization and Atomic Expansion 

Search begins at root s0, initialized with a fixed template to load user data and establish the initial Data Shadow o0. A global Negative Constraint Set K− 

> 0

= ∅ is initialized to record invalid path patterns. For any non-terminal node st in a low-entropy state, the agent performs Atomic Expan-sion . This autoregressive process generates the subsequent code unit ct+1 based on history Ht, ob-servation ot, and explicitly references K− 

> t

to avoid repeating known errors: 

at = argmax 

> a

πθ(a | Ht, o t, K− 

> t

) (5) Following the action selection, the state transitions via execution: st+1 ← Exec (st, a t). Here, K−

> t

serves as an implicit penalty, suppressing token sequences associated with prior physical failures or semantic illegality. 

3.3.2 Structural Mutation: Branching 

To prevent greedy search from trapping in local optima, we introduce a dynamic branching mech-anism(Li et al., 2022). When a node enters a decision-sensitive zone (e.g., depth d ∈ { 2, 3}) or semantic entropy exceeds a threshold ( ht(st) > δ ), the Branching Strategy is triggered. The model enters “Planning Mode,” first generating K mutu-ally exclusive Strategy Intents I = {i1, . . . , i K }

(e.g., {“Drop NaNs”, “Impute Mean”, “KNN Im-putation”}). Subsequently, child nodes are condi-tionally generated for each intent: Children (st) = {Exec (st, a (k))}Kk=1 (6) where each action is sampled conditionally as 

a(k) ∼ πθ(· | st, i k). This mimics human expert “multi-hypothesis testing” under uncertainty. 

3.3.3 State Space Compression: Merging 

To eliminate computational redundancy, we employ 

Observational Equivalence . Two nodes si, s j are observationally isomorphic if their Data Shadows are identical: 

si ∼= sj ⇐⇒ oi ≡ oj (7) Upon detection, the graph performs a Merge op-eration, collapsing nodes into a representative and retaining only the parent pointer with the optimal cumulative utility. This transforms the search space from an exponentially growing Tree into a compact Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)(Chivukula et al., 2025). 15961 Algorithm 1 TREE -N OTEBOOK Optimization                                                                                     

> Require: Inputs (U, D), Params (λ, δ, ξ, K );Ensure Trace
> τ∗
> 1: Init s0,K−← ∅ ,Q ← { s0},Vseen ← { o0}
> 2: while Q̸ =∅do
> 3: st←PopBest (Q)
> 4: if v(st)> τ success then return (s0, . . . , s t)▷
> Success 5: if h(st)> δ then A ← { Sample (st, i k)}Kk=1 ▷
> Structural 6: else A ← { Sample (st,K−)}▷Atomic 7: for c∈ A do
> 8: r, s new ←Execute (st, c )
> 9: if ris error then
> 10: snew ←Refine (st, c, r );if fails then
> K−.add (ErrPat );continue
> 11: end if
> 12: Calc onew , v new , h new ;if vnew < v (st)−ξthen
> K−.add (c)
> 13: else if onew ∈ V seen then Merge snew
> 14: else Push snew to Q;Vseen .add (onew )
> 15: end for
> 16: end while
> 17: return Failure

3.3.4 Survival of the Fittest: Pruning 

Nodes satisfying any of the following conditions are pruned: (1) Physical Failure : Execution error persists after self-correction; (2) Utility Collapse :Significant negative gradient in vt; (3) Semantic Illegality : High probability of destructive action. 

3.4 Non-linear Spatio-Temporal Backtracking 

Traditional “error → in-situ fix → retry” loops are insufficient for data science, where erroneous code often pollutes the global state. Tree-Notebook pro-poses Non-linear Spatio-Temporal Backtrack-ing , treating debugging as time travel and branch reconstruction. 

Phase I: In-situ Refinement. For minor errors or assertion failures, the system attempts low-cost in-situ repair. The model πθ generates a cor-rected code c′ 

> t

based on the error traceback rerror :

c′ 

> t

∼ πθ(· | Ht, c t, r error ). If unsuccessful after 

Nretry = 2 , the system escalates to Phase II. 

Phase II: Backtracking Reconstruction. If in-situ repair fails, the agent performs a Rollback : it abandons st and forces the physical environment to revert to the parent state st−1 using the checkpoint mechanism ( scurr ← Parent (st)). Subsequently, it triggers Branch Rebirth : a new child branch s′ 

> t

is sampled from st−1. To ensure orthogonality to the failed path, the failed action cf ail is added to the Negative Constraint Set K−, explicitly warning the model: 

πθ(c′ 

> t

| Ht−1, o t−1, K−) (8) This mechanism enables the agent to learn from trial-and-error, proactively avoiding logic that led to dead ends in previous attempts. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Given that data analysis and predictive modeling are core application scenarios of data science, we selected two authoritative and public benchmarks for extensive comparative experiments: InfiAgent-DABench (Hu et al., 2024), which covers data analysis QA tasks, and DSBench (Jing et al., 2024), which covers end-to-end data modeling tasks. Fur-thermore, to evaluate the reasoning capabilities of agents under extreme difficulty, we introduced the 

InfiAgent-DABench (Enhanced) setting, an en-hanced evaluation designed for Hard-level diffi-culty and multi-step reasoning scenarios. 

(1) Baselines To comprehensively evaluate the performance of our method, we compare it against five representative baselines: Re-Act(Yao et al., 2022), AutoGen(Wu et al., 2024), TaskWeaver(Qiao et al., 2023), Data In-terpreter(Zheng et al., 2024), Jupiter(Li et al., 2025b)and Datawise Agent(You et al., 2025). 

(2) InfiAgent-DABench This dataset contains a total of 257 questions, categorized by difficulty into Easy (82), Medium (87), and Hard (88). The pri-mary inputs for the task include CSV data files, user questions, and output format requirements. We em-ploy Accuracy as the evaluation metric, defined as the proportion of questions correctly answered by the model. 

(3) DSBench We focus on the modeling tasks within DSBench, selecting 74 tasks derived from Kaggle competitions. The evaluation utilizes two core metrics: • Task Success Rate: Determines whether the agent can complete the end-to-end predictive modeling task. • Relative Performance Gap (RPG): Quantifies the gap between the agent’s performance and the best-known performance. The formula is as follows: 

RP G = 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

pi − bi

gi − bi

(9) 15962 where N is the total number of competitions (tasks); pi is the actual performance score of the agent in the i-th competition; gi is the known highest performance score (Gold standard); and 

bi is the baseline performance score for the i-th competition. 

(4) InfiAgent-DABench Robustness Setup In the original InfiAgent-DABench dataset, Easy and Medium samples account for approximately 2/3 of the data. Our model achieved a 92.90% one-pass generation success rate on these 169 simple sam-ples. While this demonstrates the powerful capabil-ities of the backbone LLM API, it also suggests that simple tasks fail to fully stimulate the potential of the search or backtracking mechanisms designed within the Agent. Therefore, we augmented the data from two dimensions: environmental noise and data noise. Environmental Noise: We inject files with similar filenames but incorrect content into the working directory (randomly selecting ir-relevant CSVs from the dataset and renaming them) to interfere with the Agent’s file retrieval process. 

Data Noise: We populate correctly named files with random columns from irrelevant CSVs or ran-domly insert blank rows into the correct CSVs to test the Agent’s data cleaning and anti-interference capabilities. 

4.2 InfiAgent-DABench Benchmarking                                       

> Framework Model Acc (%)
> ReAct GPT-4o 81.32 AutoGen GPT-4o 73.54 TaskWeaver GPT-4o 85.99 Data Interpreter ∗GPT-4o ∗75.78 ∗
> Datawise Agent GPT-4o 85.99
> Tree-Notebook GPT-4o 89.49 (SOTA)
> ReAct GPT-4o-mini 80.08 AutoGen GPT-4o-mini 70.04 TaskWeaver GPT-4o-mini 76.65 Data Interpreter GPT-4o-mini 67.70 Datawise Agent GPT-4o-mini 82.88
> Tree-Notebook GPT-4o-mini 85.60
> ReAct Qwen2.5-72B-Ins 75.88 AutoGen Qwen2.5-72B-Ins 70.04 TaskWeaver Qwen2.5-72B-Ins 74.71 Datawise Agent Qwen2.5-72B-Ins 81.71 Jupiter (w/ VM) ∗Qwen2.5-14B-Ins ∗86.38 ∗
> Tree-Notebook Qwen2.5-72B-Ins 86.38

Table 2: Accuracy comparison of various Agents on InfiAgent-DABench. * Note: The best result in the orig-inal Jupiter paper(Li et al., 2025b) was achieved with the 14B version, and the results for Data Interpreter are taken from You et al. (2025); thus, we retain its original data for comparison with Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct. 

Under the GPT-4o setting, Tree-Notebook achieved a SOTA accuracy of 89.49%, surpassing the previous best performers, TaskWeaver (85.99%) and Datawise Agent (85.99%). This result proves the superiority of the Tree-Notebook structure in handling complex data analysis tasks. 

4.3 DSBench Benchmarking 

This set of quantitative results presents the suc-cess rate and RPG metrics of various agents on DSBench modeling tasks.                

> Framework Model Success Rate (%) / RPG
> AutoGen GPT-4o 71.62 / 34.74 GPT-4 87.84 / 45.52 GPT-4o mini 22.97 / 11.24 Datawise Agent GPT-4o 98.64 / 53.18 GPT-4o mini 98.64 / 46.61 Jupiter (Search) Qwen2.5-14B 98.64 / 51.35
> Tree-Notebook GPT-4o 98.64 / 54.20(SOTA)
> GPT-4 98.64 / 52.56 GPT-4o mini 98.64 / 49.37

Table 3: Task Success Rate and Relative Performance Gap (RPG) on DSBench. 

As seen in Table 3, most advanced models have reached a plateau in Task Success Rate at 98.64%, indicating that this metric’s discriminative power is saturated under current model capabilities. In contrast, the RPG metric better reflects modeling quality. Tree-Notebook demonstrates exceptional stability in complex modeling tasks, achieving an RPG score of 54.20 with GPT-4o support, signifi-cantly leading Datawise Agent (53.18). 

4.4 Robustness Analysis on Noisy Datasets 

To verify the model’s anti-interference capabili-ties, we selected Data Interpreter and Datawise Agent, which performed well in the benchmark ex-periments, for comparison. Table 4 presents the accuracy of each Agent on the enhanced InfiAgent-DABench (noisy dataset) and its retention ratio relative to baseline performance.                    

> Framework Model Acc. (Noise / Base) Retention
> Data Interpreter GPT-4o 61.48 / 75.78 0.8113 GPT-4o-mini 52.53 / 67.70 0.7759 Datawise Agent GPT-4o 70.04 / 85.99 0.8145 GPT-4o-mini 66.54 / 82.88 0.8028
> Tree-Notebook GPT-4o 80.54 / 89.49 0.9000
> GPT-4o-mini 75.10 / 85.60 0.8773

Table 4: Comparison of Accuracy and Robustness (Re-tention Ratio) on the Noisy Dataset. 15963 On the noise-injected dataset, Tree-Notebook maintained SOTA performance. We achieved the highest accuracy on noisy data and the largest Re-tention Ratio relative to the benchmark, demon-strating the model’s robustness against complex data. Compared to Jupiter’s brute-force search, we utilized Notebook State Caching to avoid re-dundant execution, drastically reducing time costs; compared to Datawise, although we increased ex-ploration overhead, we achieved extremely high robustness. This also corrects the previous assump-tion that a single linear path is sufficient to cope with complex environments. 

4.5 Ablation Study 

To validate the effectiveness of the core compo-nents in the Tree-Notebook framework, we con-ducted a detailed ablation study on the InfiAgent-DABench validation set. We compared the full model with three variants to deconstruct the marginal contributions of Dynamic Branch-ing , Spatio-Temporal Backtracking , and Data Shadow .

4.5.1 Experimental Setup and Variants 

We used Tree-Notebook (GPT-4o) as the Full Model and established the following variants: 

w/o Dynamic Branching (Linear Mode): Re-moves the dynamic branching mechanism. Regard-less of whether the semantic entropy ht exceeds the threshold, the model is forced to generate only a unique atomic expansion path. The search structure degenerates into a unidirectional structure, consis-tent with Datawise Agent. 

w/o Spatio-Temporal Back (Linear Debug): 

Removes the Checkpoint rollback and branch respawn mechanisms. When an error occurs, only in-situ refinement is allowed, adopting the tradi-tional “Error → Fix → Continue” linear debugging flow. 

w/o Data Shadow (Text-only Obs.): Removes the structured Data Shadow ot. The model relies solely on default text output from pandas (e.g., plain text from df.head() ) to perceive the envi-ronment, and node merging based on observational equivalence is disabled. 

4.5.2 Results and Analysis 

Table 5 presents the specific results of the ab-lation study. Experiments show that all three components contribute positively to model perfor-mance. Notably, Dynamic Branching exhibits the most significant impact on both handling complex tasks (Hard subset) and maintaining system robust-ness against environmental noise. Meanwhile, the spatio-temporal backtracking mechanism serves as a crucial error-recovery layer, preventing the propa-gation of logical failures in long-horizon reasoning.           

> Method / Variant Acc. (Base) % Acc. (Noise) % Tree-Notebook (Full) 89.49 80.54
> w/o Dynamic Branching 85.99 73.15 w/o Spatio-Temporal Back 87.55 77.82 w/o Data Shadow 86.38 76.65
> Table 5: Ablation Study Results on InfiAgent-DABench. All variants are evaluated using GPT-4o as the base model.

(1) Impact of Dynamic Branching: Removing dynamic branching caused the sharpest accuracy drop. Unlike linear methods prone to error propa-gation from early failures, dynamic branching en-ables parallel exploration under high-entropy states. This transforms code generation into an entropy-regularized trajectory optimization problem, which is essential for escaping local optima. 

(2) Impact of Spatio-Temporal Backtracking: 

Ablating this mechanism significantly reduced suc-cess in long-horizon tasks. Linear debugging can-not resolve "state pollution" (logical memory cor-ruption). In contrast, spatio-temporal backtracking uses Checkpoints for physical "time reversal," en-suring new branches s′ 

> t

respawn in clean environ-ments. This prevents the Agent from looping in contaminated contexts and boosts self-healing. 

(3) Impact of Data Shadow: Without Data Shadow ot, code generation accuracy declined due to hallucinations caused by truncated data in lim-ited contexts. Data Shadow acts as a bridge be-tween the physical environment et and cognitive state st. Crucially, it enables isomorphic merging to compress the search space into a DAG, thereby avoiding redundant computation and improving reasoning precision. 

4.6 Cost and Efficiency Analysis 

To provide a comprehensive evaluation of our pro-posed framework, we analyze the computational cost and efficiency of Tree-Notebook. Given that LLM invocations and token consumption constitute the primary overhead in LLM-based data science agents, we compare our method against several baselines. 15964 First, we evaluated the average token consump-tion per data entry across different frameworks on the InfiAgent-DABench dataset (using GPT-4o), as shown in Table 6. While basic linear frameworks like ReAct and AutoGen exhibit lower token con-sumption, they yield significantly lower accuracy. TaskWeaver incurs the highest token cost (15,069 tokens). Tree-Notebook requires a comparable but slightly lower token consumption (14,977 tokens) than TaskWeaver, yet it achieves the highest accu-racy (89.49%). This demonstrates that the token expenditure in Tree-Notebook is effectively trans-lated into performance gains.             

> Framework Avg. Tokens Cost Accuracy (%)
> ReAct 3,937 81.32 AutoGen 3,850 73.54 TaskWeaver 15,069 85.99 Datawise Agent 8,557 85.99
> Tree-Notebook 14,977 89.49
> Table 6: Average token consumption and accuracy com-parison across baseline methods on InfiAgent-DABench (Model: GPT-4o).

We further break down the invocation counts , and token usage of Tree-Notebook against the Jupyter-based baseline Datawise Agent on InfiAgent-DABench and DSBench (Table 7). While the dynamic tree structure and LLM evalu-ator add extra interactions, Tree-Notebook’s Data Shadow mechanism fully avoids redundant LLM-generated data exploration code (e.g., df.info(), df.describe()), yielding substantial exploration cost savings. This is especially pronounced on DS-Bench, where Tree-Notebook (w/o Eval, i.e., ex-cluding the semantic evaluator) reduces invocation counts to 5.73, versus 10.19 for Datawise Agent. Although tree search and the semantic evaluator in-troduce extra steps, the overall cost increase is mild and well justified by the state-of-the-art robustness and accuracy.          

> Method InfiAgent DSBench
> (Invoc. / Tokens) (Invoc. / Tokens) Datawise 3.25 / 8,557 10.19 / 23,737 Ours (w/o Eval) 3.65 / 9,841 5.73 / 17,652 Ours (Full) 5.66 / 14,977 10.37 / 24,873
> Table 7: Efficiency comparison. We report LLM invoca-tions and token consumption (Invoc. / Tokens) per task.

## 5 Conclusion 

We propose Tree-Notebook, a framework that refor-mulates data science code generation as an entropy-regularized trajectory optimization problem within a POMDP, innovatively modeling the linear inter-action process as a dynamically growing tree struc-ture where each node represents a Notebook state. By utilizing the Data Shadow mechanism to over-come the invisibility of the Python kernel state, combined with non-linear spatio-temporal back-tracking and isomorphic merging strategies, our approach effectively resolves the issues of local optima entrapment and error propagation found in traditional linear agents. Consequently, Tree-Notebook achieves state-of-the-art performance across InfiAgent-DABench, DSBench, and com-plex noisy environments, demonstrating that this non-linear tree search paradigm, mimicking human iterative reasoning, is a pivotal direction for next-generation data science agents. 

## Limitations 

Although the framework exhibits superior robust-ness in complex tasks, the introduction of dynamic tree search and multi-branch exploration, coupled with the repetitive extraction of Data Shadows at every reasoning step, significantly increases infer-ence computational overhead and time costs com-pared to traditional linear models. Furthermore, the branching strategy heavily relies on the accu-racy of the underlying LLM evaluator’s semantic entropy estimation, where insufficient model capa-bility may lead to ineffective exploration. Addition-ally, the current Data Shadow mechanism is primar-ily designed for tabular metadata, and its perception capabilities and potential performance bottlenecks when handling unstructured data (e.g., images, text) or ultra-large-scale distributed datasets remain to be further validated and optimized in future work. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2025ZD0122005) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62271485). Here, we sincerely thank the reviewers and ACs for their valuable input, which has greatly improved our work. 15965 References 

Mourad Aouini and Jinan Loubani. 2025. Towards more contextual agents: An extractor-generator optimiza-tion framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12926 .Jincheng Bai, Zhenyu Zhang, Jennifer Zhang, and Jason Zhu. 2025. Insight agents: An llm-based multi-agent system for data insights. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 4335–4339. Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gersten-berger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Pi-otr Nyczyk, et al. 2024. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial in-telligence , volume 38, pages 17682–17690. Abhi Chivukula, Jay Somasundaram, and Vijay Soma-sundaram. 2025. Agint: Agentic graph compila-tion for software engineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19635 .Victor Dibia. 2023. Lida: A tool for automatic gener-ation of grammar-agnostic visualizations and info-graphics using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.02927 .David Donoho. 2017. 50 years of data science. 

Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics ,26(4):745–766. Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and Yarin Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in large language models using semantic entropy. Nature ,630(8017):625–630. Chengquan Guo, Xun Liu, Chulin Xie, Andy Zhou, Yi Zeng, Zinan Lin, Dawn Song, and Bo Li. 2024a. Redcode: Risky code execution and generation benchmark for code agents. Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , 37:106190–106236. Siyuan Guo, Cheng Deng, Ying Wen, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. 2024b. Ds-agent: Auto-mated data science by empowering large language models with case-based reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17453 .Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. Rea-soning with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 8154–8173. Md Mahadi Hassan, Alex Knipper, and Shubhra Kanti Karmaker Santu. 2023. Chatgpt as your personal data scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13657 .Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, and Frank Hutter. 2023. Large language models for automated data science: Introducing caafe for context-aware automated fea-ture engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:44753–44775. Sirui Hong, Yizhang Lin, Bang Liu, Bangbang Liu, Bin-hao Wu, Ceyao Zhang, Danyang Li, Jiaqi Chen, Jiayi Zhang, Jinlin Wang, et al. 2025. Data interpreter: An llm agent for data science. In Findings of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,pages 19796–19821. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. 2023. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Xueyu Hu, Ziyu Zhao, Shuang Wei, Ziwei Chai, Qianli Ma, Guoyin Wang, Xuwu Wang, Jing Su, Jingjing Xu, Ming Zhu, et al. 2024. Infiagent-dabench: Eval-uating agents on data analysis tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.05507 .Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. 2023. Mlagentbench: Evaluating language agents on machine learning experimentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03302 .Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. 2022. Planning with diffu-sion for flexible behavior synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09991 .Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wen-lin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. 2024. Dsbench: How far are data science agents from becoming data science experts? arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07703 .Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for un-certainty estimation in natural language generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09664 .Jiaqi Li, Xinyi Dong, Yang Liu, Zhizhuo Yang, Quansen Wang, Xiaobo Wang, Song-Chun Zhu, Zixia Jia, and Zilong Zheng. 2025a. Reflectevo: Improving meta introspection of small llms by learning self-reflection. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 16948–16966. Shuocheng Li, Yihao Liu, Silin Du, Wenxuan Zeng, Zhe Xu, Mengyu Zhou, Yeye He, Haoyu Dong, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2025b. Jupiter: Enhanc-ing llm data analysis capabilities via notebook and inference-time value-guided search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09245 .Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. 2022. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science , 378(6624):1092–1097. 15966 Ziming Li, Qianbo Zang, David Ma, Jiawei Guo, Tuney Zheng, Minghao Liu, Xinyao Niu, Yue Wang, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu, et al. 2024. Autokaggle: A multi-agent framework for autonomous data science com-petitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20424 .Pingchuan Ma, Rui Ding, Shuai Wang, Shi Han, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. Demonstration of insightpi-lot: An llm-empowered automated data exploration system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.00477 .Junyuan Mao, Fanci Meng, Yifan Duan, Miao Yu, Xi-aojun Jia, Junfeng Fang, Yuxuan Liang, Kun Wang, and Qingsong Wen. 2025. Agentsafe: Safeguard-ing large language model-based multi-agent systems via hierarchical data management. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04392 .Tsendsuren Munkhdalai, Manaal Faruqui, and Sid-dharth Gopal. 2024. Leave no context behind: Efficient infinite context transformers with infini-attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07143 , 101. Dang Nguyen, Ali Payani, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. 2025. Beyond semantic entropy: Boosting llm uncer-tainty quantification with pairwise semantic similar-ity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.00245 .Yixin Ou, Yujie Luo, Jingsheng Zheng, Lanning Wei, Zhuoyun Yu, Shuofei Qiao, Jintian Zhang, Da Zheng, Yuren Mao, Yunjun Gao, et al. 2025. Automind: Adaptive knowledgeable agent for automated data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10974 .Bo Qiao, Liqun Li, Xu Zhang, Shilin He, Yu Kang, Chaoyun Zhang, Fangkai Yang, Hang Dong, Jue Zhang, Lu Wang, et al. 2023. Taskweaver: A code-first agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17541 .Mizanur Rahman, Amran Bhuiyan, Mohammed Saidul Islam, Md Tahmid Rahman Laskar, Ridwan Mahbub, Ahmed Masry, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. 2025. Llm-based data science agents: A survey of capabili-ties, challenges, and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04023 .Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 36:8634–8652. José Antonio Siqueira de Cerqueira, Mamia Agbese, Rebekah Rousi, Nannan Xi, Juho Hamari, and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2024. Can we trust ai agents? an experimental study towards trustworthy llm-based multi-agent systems for ai ethics. arXiv e-prints ,pages arXiv–2411. Jia Ao Sun, Hao Yu, Fabrizio Gotti, Fengran Mo, Yi-hong Wu, Yuchen Hui, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2025. Search-on-graph: Iterative informed navigation for large language model reasoning on knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08825 .Abdullah Vanlioglu. 2025. Entropy-guided sequence weighting for efficient exploration in rl-based llm fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22456 .Ante Wang, Linfeng Song, Ye Tian, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, Xiangyu Duan, Zhaopeng Tu, Jinsong Su, and Dong Yu. 2025a. Don’t get lost in the trees: Streamlining llm reasoning by overcoming tree search exploration pitfalls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11183 .Chenglong Wang, Bongshin Lee, Steven M Drucker, Dan Marshall, and Jianfeng Gao. 2025b. Data formu-lator 2: Iterative creation of data visualizations, with ai transforming data along the way. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–17. Huichen Will Wang, Larry Birnbaum, and Vidya Setlur. 2025c. Jupybara: Operationalizing a design space for actionable data analysis and storytelling with llms. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–24. Xiaobo Wang, Zixia Jia, Jiaqi Li, Qi Liu, and Zilong Zheng. 2025d. Adaptive preference optimization with uncertainty-aware utility anchor. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 19204–19225. Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2024. Executable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits rea-soning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837. Nathaniel Weir, Muhammad Khalifa, Linlu Qiu, Orion Weller, and Peter Clark. 2024. Learning to reason via program generation, emulation, and search. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:36390–36413. Muning Wen, Cheng Deng, Jun Wang, Weinan Zhang, and Ying Wen. 2024. Entropy-regularized token-level policy optimization for large language models. 

CoRR .Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. 2024. Autogen: En-abling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent con-versations. In First Conference on Language Model-ing .Yiran Wu, Feiran Jia, Shaokun Zhang, Hangyu Li, Erkang Zhu, Yue Wang, Yin Tat Lee, Richard Peng, Qingyun Wu, and Chi Wang. 2023. An empirical study on challenging math problem solving with gpt-4. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2306. 15967 Siqiao Xue, Caigao Jiang, Wenhui Shi, Fangyin Cheng, Keting Chen, Hongjun Yang, Zhiping Zhang, Jian-shan He, Hongyang Zhang, Ganglin Wei, et al. 2023. Db-gpt: Empowering database interactions with private large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.17449 .Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:11809–11822. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations .Ziming You, Yumiao Zhang, Dexuan Xu, Yiwei Lou, Yandong Yan, Wei Wang, Huaming Zhang, and Yu Huang. 2025. Datawiseagent: A notebook-centric llm agent framework for automated data science. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07044 .Xiaokang Zhang, Sijia Luo, Bohan Zhang, Zeyao Ma, Jing Zhang, Yang Li, Guanlin Li, Zijun Yao, Kangli Xu, Jinchang Zhou, et al. 2025a. Tablellm: Enabling tabular data manipulation by llms in real office usage scenarios. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 10315–10344. Yuge Zhang, Qiyang Jiang, XingyuHan XingyuHan, Nan Chen, Yuqing Yang, and Kan Ren. 2024. Bench-marking data science agents. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5677–5700. Zhenkui Zhang, Wendong Bu, Kaihang Pan, Bingchen Miao, Wenqiao Zhang, Guoming Wang, Wei Ji, Rui Tang, Juncheng Li, and Siliang Tang. 2026. Evolving generalist virtual agents with generative and associa-tive memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 13006– 13014. Zhenliang Zhang, Xinyu Hu, Huixuan Zhang, Junzhe Zhang, and Xiaojun Wan. 2025b. Icr probe: Track-ing hidden state dynamics for reliable hallucination detection in llms. In Proceedings of the 63rd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 17986– 18002. Jinjin Zhao and Sanjay Krishnan. 2025. Metadata man-agement for ai-augmented data workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06814 .Tianyu Zheng, Ge Zhang, Tianhao Shen, Xueling Liu, Bill Yuchen Lin, Jie Fu, Wenhu Chen, and Xiang Yue. 2024. Opencodeinterpreter: Integrating code generation with execution and refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14658 .Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. 2023. Lan-guage agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04406 .15968 A Appendix 

A.1 LLM Usage 

The authors of this paper utilized the web-based version of Gemini for linguistic polishing and draw-ing. 

A.2 LLM Api Usage 

The versions of the GPT API employed in the ex-periments of this paper are gpt-4o-2024-08-06 and gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18. 

A.3 Data Shadow 

The concrete implementation of Data Shadow in-vokes the Jupyter kernel at each node (Jupyter cell) to extract metadata, as shown below. 

def data_probe(local_vars): """ Extract metadata of all DataFrames in memory """ shadow = {} 

for var_name, var_value in local_vars.items (): 

if isinstance (var_value, pd.DataFrame): shadow[var_name] = { "rows": var_value.shape[0], "cols": var_value.shape[1], "columns": list (var_value. columns), "dtypes": {k: str (v) for k, v in 

var_value.dtypes. items()}, "sample": var_value.head(2). to_dict() # Simple sampling }

return shadow 

This method directly obtains data information from the Jupyter kernel, whose efficiency is negli-gibly affected by data scale (an inherent property of the Jupyter kernel). Independent of dataset row count, Data Shadow acts as a real-time updated external knowledge base, enabling the LLM to per-ceive the latest DataFrame changes. Thus, there is no need to generate data exploration code such as 

df.head() and df.info() , making the overhead from Data Shadow very small. 

A.4 POMDP Modeling Explanation 

We model data science programming as a POMDP (Partially Observable Markov Decision Process) :LLMs are "blind" to complete memory data and rely on probes/inference to proceed step-by-step. Key components: • Hidden State: Actual memory snapshot/-data distribution in Python kernel (invisible to LLMs). • Observation: "Data Shadow" via projection, extracting metadata for LLM reasoning. • Action: Python code cell driving state transi-tion. • Optimization Objective: Balance task pro-gression against uncertainty by maximizing task utility while penalizing semantic entropy. 

A.5 Basic System Configuration Prompt 

[Role Definition] You are an intelligent assistant proficient in Python and data science, working in a Jupyter Notebook environment. Your goal is to solve the user’s problem step-by -step by writing code cells (Cells). 

A.6 Code Generation Prompt 

[Role Definition] You are a senior data scientist working in the Jupyter Notebook environment, adept at continuing to write Python code cells based on existing analytical workflows. [Current Task Information] User’s Core Requirement (Question): {question} Core Knowledge Points to Apply (Concepts): { concepts} Mandatory Constraints to Follow (Constraints): { constraints} Output Format Requirements: {format} - If information output is required, use the print() function to display key results; - If a CSV path is specified, save the results as a CSV file at the corresponding path; - In the absence of explicit format requirements, use print() to output core conclusions by default. Current Analytical Strategy: {level} [Historical Context] Executed code cells and their output results: {history} [Current Data Status (Data Shadow)] Metadata of key variables in memory (type, dimension, core fields, etc.): {data_shadow} [Negative Constraints (Validated Infeasible Solutions)] {negative_constraints} [Core Instructions] Please write the **Next Cell** for Jupyter Notebook, strictly adhering to the following rules: 1. Continue writing based on historical code and current data status; do not re-import already imported libraries or re-define already defined variables; 2. The code must be directly executable, avoiding basic issues such as syntax errors and undefined variables; 15969 3. Key analytical results must be output in accordance with the specified output format (print/CSV saving); 4. Output only Python code blocks without any additional textual explanations; 5. If it is determined that the task has been fully completed based on historical context, directly output the Chinese phrase [Task Completed] (ensure the final output is generated in compliance with the output format requirements first). Output Example: ‘‘‘python # Your code ‘‘‘ 

A.7 Strategy Branching Prompt 

[Task Objective] We are currently at a critical node in data analysis. It is necessary to conduct divergent thinking based on existing information and formulate 2-3 differentiated strategies for the next step of analysis. [Basic Information] User’s Core Requirement: {question} Historical Execution Context (completed code and outputs): {history_context} Current Data Status (metadata of variables/ datasets): {data_shadow} [Output Requirements] 1. Output strictly in JSON list format without any additional text; 2. Each strategy shall contain two fields: * "strategy_name": A concise English name (e.g., DropMissing/FillMean) that reflects the core of the strategy; * "intent": A detailed Chinese description explaining the basis for formulating the strategy, specific operations, and expected objectives. Format Example: [{"strategy_name": "DropMissing", "intent": " Missing values detected in the ’Age’ column; it is decided to directly delete rows containing missing values..."}, {"strategy_name": "FillMean", "intent": "Missing values detected in the ’Age’ column; it is decided to fill the missing values with the mean value..."} ]Please output the JSON: 

A.8 Error Fixing Prompt 

[Error Report] The code generated in the previous step failed to execute. [Historical Jupyter Information] {history} [Error Code] {code} [Error Message (Traceback)] {error_msg} [Instructions] Please analyze the cause of the error, combine it with the historical context, and re-output the corrected code. Please output in a markdown code block, containing only Python code without any other text explanation. 

A.9 Scoring and Evaluation Prompt 

[Evaluation Task] You need to act as an "observer" to evaluate whether the current code cell completes the task and assess its risk. If you feel this code block solves the problem and outputs according to [User Output Constraints], boldly give a score of 1.0, which is greater than 0.9; {question} [User Output Constraints] {constraints} [Current Code] {code} [Current Code Output] {output} [Output Requirements] Please output the following metrics in JSON format: 1. "completion_score": (0.0 - 1.0) task completion score. 2. "status_probs": {{ "Effective": float, " Ineffective": float, "Destructive": float }} (Probability distribution of the three states, sum must be 1.0) Effective: Data changes are logical and move closer to the target. Ineffective: The operation is meaningless or introduces noise. Destructive: Logical error resulting in critical data loss or error. JSON Example: {{ "completion_score": 0.8, "status_probs": {{ "Effective": 0.7, " Ineffective": 0.2, "Destructive": 0.1 }} }} 15970