Title: 2026.acl-long.1001.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1001.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:25:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 21920–21942 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics

AUTO REPRODUCE : Automatic AI Experiment Reproduction with Paper Lineage 

Xuanle Zhao 1, Zilin Sang 2, Yuxuan Li 1, †, Qi Shi 1, †, Weilun Zhao 3, Shuo Wang 1,Duzhen Zhang 4, Xu Han 1, Zhiyuan Liu 1, Maosong Sun 1

> 1

Tsinghua University 2Xidian University 

> 3

OpenBMB 4University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences 

{2429527z, yxuanl1995, qshi9510}@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Efficient reproduction of research papers is piv-otal to accelerating scientific progress. How-ever, the increasing complexity of proposed methods often renders reproduction a labor-intensive endeavor, necessitating profound do-main expertise. To address this, we introduce the paper lineage, which systematically mines implicit knowledge from the cited literature. This algorithm serves as the backbone of our proposed A UTO REPRODUCE , a multi-agent framework designed to autonomously repro-duce experimental code in a complete, end-to-end manner. To ensure code executability, AUTO REPRODUCE incorporates a sampling-based unit testing strategy for rapid valida-tion. To assess reproduction capabilities, we introduce R EPRODUCE BENCH , a benchmark featuring verified implementations, alongside comprehensive metrics for evaluating both reproduction and execution fidelity. Exten-sive evaluations on PaperBench and R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH demonstrate that A UTO REPRO - 

> DUCE

consistently surpasses existing baselines across all metrics. Notably, it yields sub-stantial improvements in reproduction fidelity and final execution performance. The code is available at https://github.com/AI9Stars/ AutoReproduce .

1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) has heightened the demand for efficient work-flow iterations, making the ability to reproduce experimental results increasingly critical (Xi et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). While this capability is piv-otal for advancing various fields, the complexity of method designs and training pipelines, often re-quiring specialized expertise for comprehension (Si et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024), substantially hinders automated experimental replication. For instance, 

> †Corresponding authors.

developing a task-specific model often requires col-laboration among experts in data processing, model design, and training pipeline (Qian et al., 2023). Notably, the rapid evolution of AI has resulted in a substantial corpus of research papers, present-ing a valuable testbed for exploring the automa-tion of experiment replication (Erdil and Besiroglu, 2023). Prior work has typically focused utilizing large language models (LLMs) for automating in-depth analyses of existing papers (e.g., report or idea generation (Baek et al., 2024)) or assisting with discrete reproduction tasks (e.g., environment setup (Bogin et al., 2024), code repository refactor (Gandhi et al., 2025; Siegel et al., 2024)). However, comprehensive frameworks for automatic end-to-end reproduction remain unexplored. While the concurrent work (Seo et al., 2025) also attempts to address the task of automatic reproduction. They only focus on reproducing the contents introduced in the paper, without considering the executability of the generated code, which is crucial for faithful experimental reproduction (Wang et al., 2024c). Reproducing experiments efficiently remains a significant challenge due to insufficient experimen-tal details in research papers. We observe that dis-tinct research domains often rely on tacit knowl-edge, that is, common implementation practices like specific module architectures (Chen et al., 2024) and data processing pipelines (Nie et al., 2022) that evolve into de facto standards for subse-quent studies. An effective reproduction strategy must incorporate the domain-specific knowledge and practices surrounding the source paper. Informed by the preceding analysis, we propose the paper lineage algorithm, which identifies po-tentially unstated details by tracing cited literature and associated code repositories of the source pa-per. Building upon this algorithm, we propose AUTO REPRODUCE , a multi-agent framework de-signed for the end-to-end reproduction of experi-ments in papers. A UTO REPRODUCE contains three 

21920 key stages, literature review , paper lineage and 

code development , designed to be executed sequen-tially to generate valid reproductions. During code development, we propose a sampling-based unit testing strategy for rapid validation, thereby guar-anteeing the code executability. Furthermore, to rigorously evaluate the effi-cacy of A UTO REPRODUCE , we curate R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH , a benchmark comprising 13 re-search papers that span distinct AI sub-domains. For each entry, we manually construct and execute verified implementations to establish ground-truth performance. In our setup, LLM agents are tasked with reproducing the specific experiment imple-mentations detailed in the source papers. To as-sess the generated code, we employ five distinct metrics spanning dimensions from structural repro-duction fidelity to final execution accuracy. Ex-perimental results demonstrate that A UTO REPRO - 

> DUCE

achieves superior performance on R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH across all five metrics, validating the effectiveness of our proposed approach. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We propose paper lineage , an algorithm that en-ables the agent to learn implicit domain knowl-edge and implementation practices by analyzing the cited literature. • We propose A UTO REPRODUCE , a multi-agent framework designed for end-to-end experiment reproduction, which achieves superior perfor-mance compared with existing methods. • We construct REPRODUCE BENCH , a novel benchmark for evaluating the experiment repro-duction capabilities, which includes manually curated reference code implementations and a suite of evaluation metrics. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 LLMs for Experiment Automation 

Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly utilized to automate diverse stages within machine learning workflows, including data engineering, model selection, hyperparameter optimization, and workflow evaluation (Gu et al., 2024). For in-stance, in data engineering, LLMs are utilized to assist with many tasks such as dataset recommen-dation (Yang et al., 2025), adaptive data imputa-tion (Zhang et al., 2023), context-aware data trans-formation (Liu et al., 2023a), and feature selec-tion (Jeong et al., 2024). Also, many works ex-plore utilizing LLM-driven approaches for model selection, for example, AutoM 3L (Luo et al., 2024) proposes a retrieval-based process to select the re-quired model, while ModelGPT (Tang et al., 2024) employs generation-based methods for the same purpose. Furthermore, LLMs contribute to work-flow evaluation by enabling performance prediction (Zhang et al., 2023) and supporting zero-cost proxy method development (Hollmann et al., 2022). 

2.2 LLMs for Research Code 

Prior works have explored using LLMs for generat-ing novel ideas (Li et al., 2024; Weng et al., 2024). For example, Scimon (Wang et al., 2024b) focuses on scientific hypothesis discovery by elucidating relationships between variables, while ResearchA-gent (Baek et al., 2024) employs an agent-based system to generate open-ended ideas accompanied by conceptual methods and experimental designs. However, these approaches typically do not gener-ate implementation code for these novel concepts, leading to unverifiable results. More recently, many works (Schmidgall et al., 2025; Schmidgall and Moor, 2025) utilize multi-agent frameworks to gen-erate code implementations of proposed ideas, fur-ther promoting this field. Despite this advancement, the ideas generated by these approaches often re-main paper-level concepts, lacking the detailed sub-stance described in formally proposed papers. Achieving comparable performance in experi-mental reproduction hinges on the high-fidelity im-plementation of the methods detailed in the source paper. Recent concurrent studies (Starace et al., 2025; Seo et al., 2025; Lin et al., 2025) further un-derscore the significance of this research domain. 

3 AUTO REPRODUCE 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

Rapid AI progress yields numerous novel methods, yet manual reproduction imposes prohibitive costs in time and expertise. We thus define automated ex-periment reproduction as the task of utilizing LLM agents to generate executable code for experiment replication, thereby automating scientific verifica-tion. Given a paper P and instructions about exper-iment I, the agent A needs to reproduce the code implementation of the method and experiment pro-posed in the paper C = A(P, I), where C is the output code. 21921 Papers 

Instructions 

TASK =Traffic 

METRIC =MSE 

PATH =data 

Reproduce the {TASK } experiment 

and utilize {METRIC } for 

evaluation. 

Datasets are under path {PATH }. 

Data preprocess code is provided 

to you. 

Literature Review Code Development 

Experiment 

Summary 

Paper Lineage 

Top -k Related Paper List 

Code 

Coding 

Update Research Agent 

Code Agent 

Reflection 

Next subphase 

Crawl Official Repo 

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024 

ITRANSFORMER : I NVERTED TRANSFORMERS ARE 

EFFECTIVE FOR TIME SERIES FORECASTING 

Yong Liu ⇤

, Tengge Hu ⇤

, Haoran Zhang ⇤

, Haixu Wu, Shiyu Wang §, Lintao Ma §, Mingsheng Long B

School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China 

§Ant Group, Hangzhou, China 

{liuyong21,htg21,z-hr20,whx20 }@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn 

{weiming.wsy,lintao.mlt }@antgroup.com , mingsheng@tsinghua.edu.cn 

ABSTRACT 

The recent boom of linear forecasting models questions the ongoing passion for 

architectural modifications of Transformer-based forecasters. These forecasters 

leverage Transformers to model the global dependencies over temporal tokens of 

time series, with each token formed by multiple variates of the same timestamp. 

However, Transformers are challenged in forecasting series with larger lookback 

windows due to performance degradation and computation explosion. Besides, the 

embedding for each temporal token fuses multiple variates that represent potential 

delayed events and distinct physical measurements , which may fail in learning 

variate-centric representations and result in meaningless attention maps. In this 

work, we reflect on the competent duties of Transformer components and repurpose 

the Transformer architecture without any modification to the basic components. We 

propose iTransformer that simply applies the attention and feed-forward network 

on the inverted dimensions . Specifically, the time points of individual series are em-

bedded into variate tokens which are utilized by the attention mechanism to capture 

multivariate correlations; meanwhile, the feed-forward network is applied for each 

variate token to learn nonlinear representations. The iTransformer model achieves 

state-of-the-art on challenging real-world datasets, which further empowers the 

Transformer family with promoted performance, generalization ability across differ-

ent variates, and better utilization of arbitrary lookback windows, making it a nice 

alternative as the fundamental backbone of time series forecasting. Code is avail-

able at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/iTransformer .

1 INTRODUCTION 

ETT 

> ECL

Traffic Weather 

> Solar
> PEMS

0.38 

1.42 

0.91 

0.18 0.28 0.23 

0.43 

0.67 

0. 55 

0.26 

0.66 

0.46 

0.23 0.33 0.28 

0.12 

0.32 

0.22 

iTransformer 

Transformer 

PatchTST 

TimesNet 

DLinear 

FEDformer 

Figure 1: Performance of iTrans-

former. Average results (MSE) are 

reported following TimesNet (2023). 

Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) has achieved tremendous suc-

cess in natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020) and 

computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), growing into the foun-

dation model that follows the scaling law (Kaplan et al., 2020). 

Inspired by the immense success in extensive fields, Transformer 

with strong capabilities of depicting pairwise dependencies and 

extracting multi-level representations in sequences is emerging 

in time series forecasting (Wu et al., 2021; Nie et al., 2023). 

However, researchers have recently begun to question the validity 

of Transformer-based forecasters, which typically embed multiple 

variates of the same timestamp into indistinguishable channels 

and apply attention on these temporal tokens to capture temporal 

dependencies. Considering the numerical but less semantic rela-

tionship among time points, researchers find that simple linear 

layers, which can be traced back to statistical forecasters (Box & 

Jenkins, 1968), have exceeded complicated Transformers on both performance and efficiency (Zeng 

et al., 2023; Das et al., 2023). Meanwhile, ensuring the independence of variate and utilizing mutual 

⇤Equal Contribution 

1

> arXiv:2310.06625v4 [cs.LG] 14 Mar 2024

Research Agent 

Method 

Summary 

Overall 

Summary 

Review 

…1 k

Research Agent 

Code Agent 

Review 

Summary 

Summary 

Prev Code 

Exec 

Paper Lineage 

Method 

Replication 

Data 

Acquisition 

Experiment 

Execution 

Code 

Refactor 

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024 

> Time Steps
> Embedding

Token Attention over 

Temporal Tokens 

> Embedding
> Variates

Token 

Attention over 

Variate Tokens 

FFN on Series 

Representations 

Time 

> Value

Invert 

Time 

> Value

Token 

Token 

Token Token 

Token 

Token 

Transformer 

View 

iTransformer 

View 

> Variate -Mixed
> Representation
> Variate -Unmixed
> Representation

FFN on Multi variate 

Representations 

Figure 2: Comparison between the vanilla Transformer (top) and the proposed iTransformer (bottom). 

Transformer embeds the temporal token, which contains the multivariate representation of each time 

step. iTransformer embeds each series independently to the variate token, such that the attention mod-

ule depicts the multivariate correlations and the feed-forward network encodes series representations. 

information is ever more highlighted by recent research that explicitly models multivariate correla-

tions to achieve accurate forecasting (Zhang & Yan, 2023; Ekambaram et al., 2023), but this goal can 

be hardly achieved without subverting the vanilla Transformer architecture. 

Considering the disputes of Transformer-based forecasters, we reflect on why Transformers perform 

even worse than linear models in time series forecasting while acting predominantly in many other 

fields. We notice that the existing structure of Transformer-based forecasters may be not suitable for 

multivariate time series forecasting. As shown on the top of Figure 2, it is notable that the points 

of the same time step that basically represent completely different physical meanings recorded by 

inconsistent measurements are embedded into one token with wiped-out multivariate correlations. 

And the token formed by a single time step can struggle to reveal beneficial information due to 

excessively local receptive field and time-unaligned events represented by simultaneous time points .

Besides, while series variations can be greatly influenced by the sequence order, permutation-

invariant attention mechanisms are improperly adopted on the temporal dimension (Zeng et al., 

2023). Consequently, Transformer is weakened to capture essential series representations and portray 

multivariate correlations, limiting its capacity and generalization ability on diverse time series data. 

Concerning the potential risks of embedding multivariate points of a timestamp as a (temporal) token ,

we take an inverted view on time series and embed the whole time series of each variate independently 

into a (variate) token, the extreme case of Patching (Nie et al., 2023) that enlarges local receptive field. 

By inverting, the embedded token aggregates the global representations of series that can be more 

variate-centric and better leveraged by booming attention mechanisms for multivariate correlating. 

Meanwhile, the feed-forward network can be proficient enough to learn generalizable representations 

for distinct variates encoded from arbitrary lookback series and decoded to predict future series. 

Based on the above motivations, we believe it is not that Transformer is ineffective for time series 

forecasting, but rather it is improperly used. In this paper, we revisit the structure of Transformer and 

advocate iTransformer as a fundamental backbone for time series forecasting. Technically, we embed 

each time series as variate tokens , adopt the attention for multivariate correlations, and employ the 

feed-forward network for series representations. Experimentally, the proposed iTransformer achieves 

state-of-the-art performance on real-world forecasting benchmarks shown in Figure 1 and surprisingly 

tackles the pain points of Transformer-based forecasters. Our contributions lie in three aspects: 

• We reflect on the architecture of Transformer and refine that the competent capability of 

native Transformer components on multivariate time series is underexplored. 

• We propose iTransformer that regards independent time series as tokens to capture multivari-

ate correlations by self-attention and utilize layer normalization and feed-forward network 

modules to learn better series-global representations for time series forecasting. 

• Experimentally, iTransformer achieves comprehensive state-of-the-art on real-world bench-

marks. We extensively analyze the inverted modules and architecture choices, indicating a 

promising direction for the future improvement of Transformer-based forecasters. 

2

Processing 

Code 

class Dataset_Custom (Dataset ): 

def __ init __( self , root_path ,

flag= 'train' , size= None ,

features= 'M' ,

data_path ='traffic.csv ',

target= 'OT' , scale= True ,

freq ='h' ): 

Inputs Analyze Figure 1: The paper content, instructions and data processing code (if necessary) are provided for each reproduction task. The workflow of A UTO REPRODUCE , which is decomposed into three subphases. (i) Literature Review, the research agent summarize the overall, method and experiment contents. (ii) Paper Lineage, the research agent lists and reviews related papers, and the code agent filters files in the corresponding repositories. (iii) Code Development, the code agent and research agent collaborate to construct executable reproduction code. 

3.2 Workflow 

We introduce A UTO REPRODUCE , a novel multi-agent framework for reproducing experiments from research papers. As illustrated in Figure 1, its pipeline is structured into three key phases: (i) Lit-erature Review, (ii) Paper Lineage, and (iii) Code Development. This process is collaboratively exe-cuted by two specialized agents: a research agent for text-centric tasks such as paper summarization and related work analysis, and a code agent respon-sible for all code-oriented tasks, including imple-mentation and debugging. 

3.2.1 Literature Review 

To mitigate the information redundancy inherent in research papers, the Research Agent employs a hierarchical three-stage summarization protocol to comprehensively extract core methodologies and experimental nuances. The process begins with a holistic paper-level overview, followed by targeted summaries that distill specific method details, such as mathematical formulations and implementation specifics, as well as the critical experimental set-tings required for reproduction. Acknowledging that effective summarization hinges on the quality of text extraction, where direct parsing methods (Schmidgall et al., 2025) often struggle with com-plex artifacts like mathematical formulas and ta-bles, we employ MinerU (Wang et al., 2024a). This tool converts PDFs into Markdown format, signifi-cantly enhancing the fidelity of data preservation. Furthermore, to augment semantic understanding, AUTO REPRODUCE offers an optional capability to enrich summaries by integrating insights from visual structure diagrams. 

3.2.2 Paper Lineage 

Scientific research is an inherently cumulative pro-cess, where novel methods evolve upon the founda-tion of existing studies. This iterative progression fosters domain-specific conventions and implicit consensus, forming a historical context we term the Paper Lineage . To systematically exploit this, we propose the Paper Lineage algorithm to ana-lyze the research landscape and uncover these pre-vailing practices. Specifically, the research agent identifies the top-k relevant papers (default k=3) from the source paper’s references. This selection is driven by an analysis of citation relationships within the source paper’s full context, where rele-vance is defined by the alignment of research fields and proposed methods. Notably, comparison base-lines detailed in the primary experimental section are prioritized as the most critical references for analysis. Upon acquiring the relevant paper list, the research agent retrieves the manuscripts via the 

ArXiv API , summarizes their content, and identi-21922 fies linked code repositories. It then employs the 

GitHub API to clone the corresponding repository. To isolate relevant files from extraneous reposi-tory content, the code agent leverages the paper summary and task instructions to selectively ex-tract essential source files. These code segments are paired with their summaries to construct <sum-mary, code> tuples, which serve as domain-aligned reference exemplars for subsequent generation. For papers lacking public repositories, their summaries alone are utilized as high-quality conceptual knowl-edge sources. The detailed procedure and prompts are outlined in Algorithm 1 and Figure 5, 6. 

3.2.3 Code Development 

The code development phase constitutes the final stage of the A UTO REPRODUCE workflow, where the research and code agents collaborate to produce a reproducible and executable implementation of the target experiment. To guarantee a high-fidelity reproduced implementation, this phase is structured into three main stages, culminating in a final refac-toring of the generated code. To facilitate code execution and debugging, we provide a Docker container that encapsulates the Python runtime and common libraries such as PyTorch and Numpy. When encountering missing dependencies, the code agent can utilize ``` Bash\n<command>\n ``` to install the necessary packages. 

Data Acquisition. The preliminary phase fo-cuses on dataset curation and attribute analysis. Although off-the-shelf datasets from libraries like 

torchvision are readily available, many tasks de-mand the curation of custom datasets derived di-rectly from raw data. Reproducing prior work is often impeded by the insufficient documentation of data preprocessing method and the absence of stan-dardized data formats. To mitigate this issue, we categorize source papers based on dataset prove-nance: standard benchmarks or custom datasets. For papers relying on standard benchmarks, A U-

> TO

REPRODUCE generates loading code using es-tablished libraries. For those involving custom datasets, we provide corresponding preprocessing pipelines to enable seamless agent utilization. Fur-thermore, to prevent runtime failures arising from mismatches in critical data properties, such as ten-sor shape and data type, A UTO REPRODUCE em-ploys a proactive inference mechanism. The code agent extracts these attributes by generating and executing analysis code on sampled mini-batches, thereby gathering essential context to guide the subsequent code generation process. In response to execution errors, the code agent first diagnoses the error traceback and refines the script using the EDIT command, structured as 

``` EDIT\n N M\n<new code>\n ``` . We decou-ple error analysis and code editing into two dis-tinct steps, as we observe that conducting a pre-liminary analysis to guide the debugging process significantly improves the success rate. The EDIT 

command facilitates targeted updates by replacing lines N through M with the generated code segment, rather than regenerating the entire file. This granu-lar approach significantly reduces token generation overhead and is employed consistently through-out all subsequent phases of our framework. The prompt of the command is illustrated in Figure 7. 

Method Replication. This stage is dedicated to implementing the method. The code agent synthe-sizes code snippets and resolves errors by leverag-ing established context, including the paper sum-mary, inferred data attributes, and domain knowl-edge retrieved from the Paper Lineage. Simulta-neously, the research agent validates the generated code against the method summary, providing cor-rective feedback while dynamically updating the summary to steer the implementation. The code agent begins by generating an initial implemen-tation, which is then iteratively refined through a collaborative mechanism. While the code agent debugs potential errors in model computations by inspecting data flow properties, the research agent validates the code against the paper summary, up-dating the summary to guide the code agent in resolving any identified discrepancies The research agent chooses to submit the code once it fully aligns with the paper. 

Experiments Execution This phase is dedicated to the implementation of the full experimental pipeline. Leveraging the established dual-agent loop, the system verifies that the code correctly reflects the experimental settings from the source paper. We continue to employ mini-batch sampling to accelerate debugging. To validate epoch-related configurations, the code agent generates the com-plete experiment script equipped with early-exit mechanisms, such as break . This enables a rapid dry run to validate the pipeline prior to full training. This phase concludes with a comprehensive refactoring process to remove unnecessary debug settings and clean up the generated code. 21923 Method Domain Dataset Metrics                                                      

> IEBins (Shao et al., 2023) Monocular Depth Estimation NYU-Depth-v2 δ < 1.25
> iTransformer (Liu et al., 2023b) Time Series Forecasting Traffic MSE
> DKD (Zhao et al., 2022) Knowledge Distillation CIFAR-100 Accuracy
> SimVP (Gao et al., 2022) Video Prediction Moving MNIST MSE
> HumanMAC (Chen et al., 2023a) Human Motion Prediction HumanEva-I ADE
> SFNet (Cui et al., 2023) Image Dehazing SOTS-Indoor PSNR
> LSM (Wu et al., 2023) Solving PDEs Darcy MSE
> Swin-Unet (Cao et al., 2022) Medical Image Segmentation Synapse DSC
> TDGNN-w (Wang and Derr, 2021) Node Classification Citeseer Accuracy
> TimeVAE (Desai et al., 2021) Time Series Generation Sine 20% Predictor
> WCDM (Jiang et al., 2023) Low-light Image Enhance LOLv1 SSIM
> BSPM (Choi et al., 2023) Collaborative Filtering Gowalla Recall
> DAT-S (Chen et al., 2023b) Image Super-Resolution DF2K/Set5 PSNR

Table 1: List of papers in R EPRODUCE BENCH . To illustrate the specific experiments, we list each experimental detail, including the method names, task domains, datasets, and evaluation metrics. 

4 REPRODUCE BENCH 

4.1 Contributions 

Our approach prioritizes experiment reproducibil-ity by focusing on code execution and final perfor-mance. This distinguishes our work from methods like Paper2Code (Seo et al., 2025), which generate code in a single pass without considering execution. To this end, we construct R EPRODUCE BENCH ,a paper reproduction benchmark that establishes a comprehensive evaluation framework to assess agent fidelity and performance. 

4.2 Paper Selection 

We establish a rigorous curation pipeline utiliz-ing PapersWithCode, covering diverse domains such as CV and NLP along with their respective sub-domains. Within each category, we screen 5–10 candidate papers to verify code complete-ness and reproducibility, culminating in the selec-tion of at most one high-quality representative per sub-domain. Consequently, R EPRODUCE BENCH 

comprises 13 human-curated papers spanning a broad spectrum of complexities, ranging from foun-dational applications like knowledge distillation (Zhao et al., 2022) to specialized challenges such as solving Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) (Wu et al., 2023). Moreover, these papers encom-pass varied experimental conditions, including the two primary paradigms of training from scratch and fine-tuning pre-trained models. The construc-tion and validation of R EPRODUCE BENCH follow a three-stage protocol. First, we identify represen-tative method variants, experimental settings, and evaluation metrics specific to each paper. Next, we manually curate the official code repositories. This critical step involves excising boilerplate and refac-toring the repository to isolate the core implemen-tation from auxiliary logic. Finally, we re-execute all experiments to validate reproducibility and es-tablish a verified baseline, ensuring fair and unam-biguous evaluation. Detailed statistics are listed in Table 1. We adopt these reproduced results as the ground truth to guarantee consistent benchmarking and mitigate potential misinterpretation. 

4.3 Evaluation 

Given the availability of reference code and performance baselines in our curated R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH , we conduct evaluations from two key perspectives to explore: (i) Does the generated code accurately reflect the core contributions and experimental setup as proposed in the source pa-per? (ii) Can the generated code fully reproduce the experimental performance metrics rerun by our-selves? To answer these questions, we introduce two primary evaluation metrics, evaluating from alignment and execution aspects, respectively. 

Align-Score: To assess alignment fidelity, we conduct a comparative analysis bridging the gen-erated code, the core content of the paper, and the manually curated reference implementation. We examine the results across three distinct dimen-sions. (1) Paper-Level: Given the source paper, we utilize an LLM (default o1 ) to extract five critical components essential for experimental reproduc-tion. Subsequently, we prompt the LLM to assess the degree to which the generated code satisfies these key objectives. (2) Code-Level: Leveraging manually annotated reference implementations, we first ensure that extraneous logic is stripped away to establish a clean ground truth. We then prompt the LLM to evaluate the generated code against this reference across four specific dimensions, encom-passing overall structure, model details, training details, and experimental integrity. 3) Mixed-Level: 21924 Baselines LLM Align-Score Exec-Score (%) 

Paper-Level Code-Level Mixed-Level Exec Rate Perf Gap ( ↓)ChatDev GPT-4o 57 .33 32 .80 43 .33 2.56 99 .62 

Agent Laboratory GPT-4o 63 .47 35 .32 48 .64 23 .08 82 .31 

PaperCoder o3-mini 90 .41 47 .54 60 .26 17 .94 89 .23 

AUTO -REPRODUCE 

GPT-4o 82 .13 41 .52 56 .24 76 .92 41 .77 

Claude-3.5-Sonnet 90 .27 54 .11 69 .97 84 .62 31 .62 

o3-mini 90 .86 58 .48 75 .21 92 .31 24 .31 

Gemini-2.5-Pro 91 .57 60 .26 77 .56 94 .87 19 .72  

> Table 2: The evaluation of various agents on R EPRODUCE BENCH , utilizing both o1-as-judge and execution. The presented results for each metric represent the mean value derived from three independent runs conducted across all papers in the benchmark. The best performance is indicated in Bold .

Our analysis reveals that paper-level evaluation of-ten overlooks granular implementation details, po-tentially inflating scores, whereas code-level eval-uation can be overly sensitive to syntactic varia-tions, leading to score deflation. To address this trade-off, we propose the mixed-level evaluation strategy. This method supplies the LLM with both the key objectives extracted from the paper and the reference code context. Our evaluation results demonstrate that enabling the model to ground ab-stract requirements in concrete implementation pat-terns leads to significantly more nuanced scoring of the generated code. Consequently, this approach captures both critical features and detailed logic, demonstrating improved consistency with human judgment. Unlike Paper2Code (Seo et al., 2025), which relies on a single holistic score (1-5 scores), our framework offers a fine-grained assessment by validating individual implementation points. 

Exec-Score: Given that experimental reproduc-tion is fundamentally a code generation task, the execution outcomes of the generated code are of paramount importance. We assess this dimension by measuring the Execution Rate (Exec Rate) and the final experimental performance gap (Perf Gap). To address the heterogeneity of performance met-rics across diverse research papers, we propose the relative performance gap as a unified evalua-tion standard. This metric quantifies the relative deviation between the final results yielded by the generated code and the reference performance es-tablished by our curated implementations.         

> Performance Gap = 1
> n
> n∑
> i=1
> |Pref
> i−Pagent
> i|
> max( Pref
> i,Pagent
> i)(1)

where Pref and Pagent are the performance obtained under the reference code and agent-generated code, respectively. Since not all gen-erated code can be executed, the Pagent ,i is set to 0 for the non-executable instances, resulting in a maximum performance gap of 1.0. Furthermore, to prevent the performance gap from exceeding 1.0, especially in cases with small reference per-formance values (e.g. Pref  

> i

= 0 .1 and Pagent  

> i

= 0 .3

when utilizing MSE as the evaluation metric), we normalize the gap by the larger performance value of Pref and Pagent . Reference performance values are derived by executing our verified ground-truth implementations. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Baselines and Benchmarks 

To better compare our proposed A UTO REPRO -

> DUCE

, we compare previous work on software development and paper generation, including ChatDev (Qian et al., 2023), Agent Laboratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025) and PaperCoder (Seo et al., 2025). To our knowledge, PaperCoder is concurrent work compared to A UTO REPRODUCE .For all the metrics in the align-score, we employ o1 

as the LLM judge for evaluations. Beyond R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH , we also evaluate A UTO REPRODUCE 

on PaperBench Code-Dev (Starace et al., 2025), which imposes requirements distinct from our pri-mary benchmark. To align with its focus on static code generation for all experiments without execu-tion, we streamline the A UTO REPRODUCE by omit-ting the iterative debugging phase and configuring the system to generate the complete experimental code including baseline methods. 

5.2 Main Results 

We evaluate the implementation code generated by various baselines using different LLM backbones, 21925 Baselines Backbone Rep. Score (%) BasicAgent o3-mini 6.4

IterativeAgent o3-mini 17 .3

IterativeAgent o1-high 43 .4

PaperCoder o3-mini 45 .1

AUTO REPRODUCE 

(w/o Paper Lineage) o3-mini 44 .1

Default Setting o3-mini 48 .5

(w/ Visual Diagram) o3-mini 49 .6

> Table 3: valuation results on PaperBench Code-dev are presented. Rep. Score denotes the Replication Score. The final three rows represent various configurations of AUTO REPRODUCE .

with three runs conducted for each paper. Detailed results in Table 2 demonstrate that our proposed AUTO REPRODUCE achieves superior performance across all the metrics, notably in execution rate and performance gap. By employing a sampling batch approach for efficient debugging, A UTO REPRO - 

> DUCE

significantly enhances the execution rate of the generated code and reduces its performance gap with the reference code. In addition, as shown in Table 3, A UTO REPRODUCE also achieves superior performance on the PaperBench Code-Dev bench-mark, particularly when utilizing the paper lineage algorithm. We also observe that enabling the agents to process information from visual diagrams fur-ther improves performance, as some experimental settings are denoted within the diagrams. Our analysis indicates that LLM judges may overrate consistency when comparing paper con-tents against generated code. This overestimation stems from the generality of textual descriptions, which can reward broad functional similarity rather than precise replication. Conversely, directly com-paring generated code with reference implementa-tions is also problematic, as reference code includes settings unmentioned in the paper, thereby skew-ing reproducibility assessments. In contrast, our proposed mixed-level scoring aligns more closely with human evaluators and offers a more reliable metric for evaluating reproduction capabilities. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

To explore and evaluate our proposed methods, we conduct ablation experiments to investigate: (i) the utility of the visual diagrams and the impact of con-tent extraction MinerU during literature review, (ii) the effectiveness of our proposed Paper Lineage method and (iii) the performance difference be-Ablations Mixed-Level Perf Gap % ( ↓)

w/ Visual Diagram 70 .14 35 .83 

w/o MinerU 58 .42 47 .81 

w/o Paper Lineage 63 .15 39 .59 

w/o Refine 65 .78 36 .37 

w/o Debug+Refine 68 .32 88 .78 

AUTO REPRODUCE 69 .97 31 .62    

> Table 4: The ablation study for evaluating A UTO REPRO -
> DUCE with various subphases, the results are measured using mixed-level and performance gap metrics. We employ Claude-3.5-Sonnet as the LLM backbone.

tween including debugging and refinement versus one-time code generation in the Code Development phase. Due to time constraints, we conduct only an experiment for each paper and evaluate on the Mixed-Level and Performance Gap metrics. The results in Table 4 demonstrate that current settings reach the optimal balanced performance. Although including the visual diagram ( w/ Visual Diagram) shows slightly better performance on the mixed-level metric, upon reviewing the scores of this particular implementation against the default setting, we observe no substantial overall differ-ence. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the Paper Lineage algorithm, coupled with debug-ging and refinement processes, produces significant improvements across both evaluation metrics. 

5.4 Human Evaluation 

To rigorously assess the reproduction results, we conduct a human evaluation study. For each in-stance, evaluators are presented with the task in-structions, full paper content, reference code, and the generated output. They assess the code across three dimensions: methodological reproducibility, hyperparameter configuration, and the experimen-tal pipeline, assigning maximum scores of 10, 5, and 5, respectively (see Appendix A.4). The pri-mary objective of this study is to validate the ef-ficacy of our Mixed-Level metric. Consequently, we calculate and report the Pearson correlation be-tween human judgments and LLM-evaluated scores in Appendix A.4.2. Analysis of the results in Ta-ble 2, 5, and 8 reveals that mixed-level scores ex-hibit a stronger correlation with human evaluation than either paper-level or code-level metrics. Qual-itative feedback highlights a distinct trend. While LLM agents demonstrate proficiency in reproduc-ing high-level model architectures, their implemen-21926 Baselines LLM Method Parameter Experiment Overall ChatDev GPT-4o 4.08 ± 1.00 2.85 ± 0.37 1.92 ± 0.15 8.86 ± 1.12 

PaperCoder o3-mini 6.84 ± 0.52 3.46 ± 0.31 2.92 ± 0.23 13 .24 ± 0.68 

AUTO REPRODUCE Claude-3.5-Sonnet 7.23 ± 0.90 3.69 ± 0.37 3.27 ± 0.14 14 .19 ± 0.99 

AUTO REPRODUCE o3-mini 7.36 ± 0.82 3.73 ± 0.25 3.52 ± 0.16 14 .61 ± 0.84 

Table 5: The comparative analysis of human evaluation scores, including the calculated mean and standard deviation. 2 3 5  

> Top1 Recall@
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 0.54
> 0.77
> 0.92
> 235
> Hits@
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 1.53
> 2.23
> 3.73

Figure 2: The correlation analysis of papers selected. We utilize Claude-3.5-Sonnet and calculate the mean values of the given metrics. 

tations frequently deviate from the reference code regarding granular specifications, such as convolu-tion stride and padding values. Furthermore, the precise reproduction of experimental results is of-ten hindered by the absence of training configu-rations in source papers, particularly concerning learning rate decay strategies and schedulers. 

5.5 Paper Lineage Analysis 

In our setting, A UTO REPRODUCE constructs paper lineages by selecting related papers via content and citation analysis. To validate the relevance of the papers selected, we establish an expert-curated set of references as standard lineage papers. Specifi-cally, for each source paper, domain experts man-ually curate five gold-standard references, priori-tizing high research relevance and temporal prox-imity. Search engines such as Google Scholar and Semantic Scholar are utilized to facilitate this se-lection process. Given that A UTO REPRODUCE de-fault selects k papers for each source paper, where 

k ∈ { 2, 3, 5}, we evaluate under two conditions. (i) Mean Top-1 Recall@ k. Whether the most relevant expert-curated reference is included among the k

lineage papers selected by A UTO REPRODUCE . (ii) Mean Hits@ N . The number of lineage papers se-lected by A UTO REPRODUCE are present within the expert-curated set. The results in Figure 2 indicate strong agreement between the LLMs and humans in selecting lineage papers.                              

> Phase Debugging Refinement Turns Lines Turns Lines
> Claude-3.5-Sonnet
> Methods 5.78 33 .52 2.16 40 .53
> Experiments 2.84 34 .18 1.59 19 .29
> o3-mini
> Methods 2.14 21 .74 1.23 15 .65
> Experiments 0.94 30 .42 0.72 24 .73
> Gemini-2.5-Pro
> Methods 1.97 28 .43 1.19 28 .10
> Experiments 0.92 26 .48 0.78 19 .38

Table 6: The average number of turns and lines when utilizing the EDIT command. 

5.6 Debugging and Refinement Analysis 

Given that A UTO REPRODUCE utilizes EDIT com-mand for debugging and refinement, we conduct a further analysis on the details of the code edit-ing. To characterize the editing statistics, we define two key metrics: average editing turns and average lines per turn, which are calculated by Nturns /N runs 

and Nlines /N turns respectively. Here, Nlines is the total number of edited lines, Nturns is the total num-ber of edit turns, and Nruns is the total number of successful runs. This analysis exclusively consid-ers executable code generated during the method replication and experiment execution subphases. The results indicate that utilizing o3-mini and 

Gemini-2.5-Pro as the LLM backbone are more efficient than Claude-3.5-Sonnet , as evidenced by the fewer debugging and refinement iterations required to converge on high replicability and exe-cutable experiment implementations. 

6 Conclusion 

In this study, we explore the automatic experiment reproduction and propose A UTO REPRODUCE , a multi-agent workflow with paper lineage algorithm and unit testing with a sample batch to generate reproducible and executable code implementations. For evaluation, we introduce R EPRODUCE BENCH ,an experiment reproduction benchmark containing 13 papers and their human-curated implementation code. This benchmark employs multi-level crite-21927 ria to assess the performance of generated code, spanning from alignment to execution fidelity. Fi-nally, the result shows that A UTO REPRODUCE per-forms superior to other approaches in both R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH and PaperBench. We believe that this work will further promote research on paper reproduction and code generation. 

7 Acknowledgment 

The work was initiated and supported by the AI9Stars Team. We are grateful for the support of the OpenBMB team. 

Limitations 

In this work, we investigate the automatic repro-ducibility of AI experiments, a critical aspect we be-lieve will significantly advance automation within the AI field. However, our current approach has certain limitations that present avenues for future research. Primarily, our method is specialized for replicating individual experimental tasks rather than performing broader code generation at the repository level. Consequently, enhancing execu-tion capabilities within the context of repo-level code warrants further exploration. Furthermore, the inherent complexity of raw datasets often ne-cessitates preliminary data processing. Automating this data preprocessing stage represents a substan-tial research challenge that must be addressed to achieve more comprehensive automation. 

Ethics Statement 

The primary objective of this work is to automate the replication of experiments detailed in exist-ing, publicly available research papers. While the methodologies are drawn from the public do-main, which generally implies transparency, it is important to acknowledge the potential for data leakage associated with using our system. Users should therefore be mindful of this possibility, par-ticularly when the replication process might in-volve sensitive datasets or generate intermediate results that could inadvertently disclose informa-tion. We provide a license check in the Appendix for the License of papers and code in the R EPRO -

> DUCE

BENCH . Furthermore, LLMs are utilized for writing and refining the paper contents. 

References 

Jinheon Baek, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, Silviu Cucerzan, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2024. Researchagent: Iter-ative research idea generation over scientific liter-ature with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07738 .Ben Bogin, Kejuan Yang, Shashank Gupta, Kyle Richardson, Erin Bransom, Peter Clark, Ashish Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. 2024. Super: Evaluating agents on setting up and executing tasks from research repositories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07440 .Hu Cao, Yueyue Wang, Joy Chen, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Qi Tian, and Manning Wang. 2022. Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation. In European conference on computer vision , pages 205–218. Springer. Jieneng Chen, Jieru Mei, Xianhang Li, Yongyi Lu, Qi-hang Yu, Qingyue Wei, Xiangde Luo, Yutong Xie, Ehsan Adeli, Yan Wang, et al. 2024. Transunet: Re-thinking the u-net architecture design for medical image segmentation through the lens of transformers. 

Medical Image Analysis , 97:103280. Ling-Hao Chen, Jiawei Zhang, Yewen Li, Yiren Pang, Xiaobo Xia, and Tongliang Liu. 2023a. Humanmac: Masked motion completion for human motion predic-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 9544–9555. Zheng Chen, Yulun Zhang, Jinjin Gu, Linghe Kong, Xiaokang Yang, and Fisher Yu. 2023b. Dual aggre-gation transformer for image super-resolution. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international confer-ence on computer vision , pages 12312–12321. Jeongwhan Choi, Seoyoung Hong, Noseong Park, and Sung-Bae Cho. 2023. Blurring-sharpening process models for collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 46th international ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval ,pages 1096–1106. Yuning Cui, Yi Tao, Zhenshan Bing, Wenqi Ren, Xin-wei Gao, Xiaochun Cao, Kai Huang, and Alois Knoll. 2023. Selective frequency network for image restora-tion. In The eleventh international conference on learning representations .Abhyuday Desai, Cynthia Freeman, Zuhui Wang, and Ian Beaver. 2021. Timevae: A variational auto-encoder for multivariate time series generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08095 .Ege Erdil and Tamay Besiroglu. 2023. Explosive growth from ai automation: A review of the argu-ments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11690 .Shubham Gandhi, Dhruv Shah, Manasi Patwardhan, Lovekesh Vig, and Gautam Shroff. 2025. Research-codeagent: An llm multi-agent system for auto-mated codification of research methodologies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20117 .21928 Zhangyang Gao, Cheng Tan, Lirong Wu, and Stan Z Li. 2022. Simvp: Simpler yet better video predic-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 3170–3180. Yang Gu, Hengyu You, Jian Cao, Muran Yu, Hao-ran Fan, and Shiyou Qian. 2024. Large language models for constructing and optimizing machine learning workflows: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10478 .Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. 2022. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves small tabular classi-fication problems in a second. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01848 .Daniel P Jeong, Zachary C Lipton, and Pradeep Raviku-mar. 2024. Llm-select: Feature selection with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02694 .Hai Jiang, Ao Luo, Haoqiang Fan, Songchen Han, and Shuaicheng Liu. 2023. Low-light image enhance-ment with wavelet-based diffusion models. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6):1–14. Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yum-ing Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, et al. 2024. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via novel idea development with llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13185 .Zhong-Zhi Li, Duzhen Zhang, Ming-Liang Zhang, Ji-axin Zhang, Zengyan Liu, Yuxuan Yao, Haotian Xu, Junhao Zheng, Pei-Jie Wang, Xiuyi Chen, et al. 2025. From system 1 to system 2: A survey of reasoning large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17419 .Zijie Lin, Yiqing Shen, Qilin Cai, He Sun, Jinrui Zhou, and Mingjun Xiao. 2025. Autop2c: An llm-based agent framework for code repository generation from multimodal content in academic papers. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.20115. Shang-Ching Liu, ShengKun Wang, Wenqi Lin, Chung-Wei Hsiung, Yi-Chen Hsieh, Yu-Ping Cheng, Sian-Hong Luo, Tsungyao Chang, and Jianwei Zhang. 2023a. Jarvix: A llm no code platform for tabu-lar data analysis and optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02213 .Yong Liu, Tengge Hu, Haoran Zhang, Haixu Wu, Shiyu Wang, Lintao Ma, and Mingsheng Long. 2023b. itransformer: Inverted transformers are ef-fective for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06625 .Daqin Luo, Chengjian Feng, Yuxuan Nong, and Yiqing Shen. 2024. Autom3l: An automated multimodal ma-chine learning framework with large language mod-els. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , pages 8586–8594. Yuqi Nie, Nam H Nguyen, Phanwadee Sinthong, and Jayant Kalagnanam. 2022. A time series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14730 .Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. 2023. Chatdev: Communica-tive agents for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924 .Samuel Schmidgall and Michael Moor. 2025. Agen-trxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous research. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18102 .Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. Agent labora-tory: Using llm agents as research assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04227 .Minju Seo, Jinheon Baek, Seongyun Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2025. Paper2code: Automating code gen-eration from scientific papers in machine learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17192 .Shuwei Shao, Zhongcai Pei, Xingming Wu, Zhong Liu, Weihai Chen, and Zhengguo Li. 2023. Iebins: It-erative elastic bins for monocular depth estimation. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,36:53025–53037. Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2024. Can llms generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ nlp researchers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.04109 .Zachary S Siegel, Sayash Kapoor, Nitya Nagdir, Benedikt Stroebl, and Arvind Narayanan. 2024. Core-bench: Fostering the credibility of published re-search through a computational reproducibility agent benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11363 .Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thomp-son, et al. 2025. Paperbench: Evaluating ai’s ability to replicate ai research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01848 .Zihao Tang, Zheqi Lv, Shengyu Zhang, Fei Wu, and Kun Kuang. 2024. Modelgpt: Unleashing llm’s capa-bilities for tailored model generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12408 .Bin Wang, Chao Xu, Xiaomeng Zhao, Linke Ouyang, Fan Wu, Zhiyuan Zhao, Rui Xu, Kaiwen Liu, Yuan Qu, Fukai Shang, et al. 2024a. Mineru: An open-source solution for precise document content extrac-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18839 .Qingyun Wang, Doug Downey, Heng Ji, and Tom Hope. 2024b. Scimon: Scientific inspiration machines opti-mized for novelty. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 279–299. 21929 Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. 2024c. Exe-cutable code actions elicit better llm agents. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Yu Wang and Tyler Derr. 2021. Tree decomposed graph neural network. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM in-ternational conference on information & knowledge management , pages 2040–2049. Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Guangsheng Bao, Hongbo Zhang, Jindong Wang, Yue Zhang, and Linyi Yang. 2024. Cycleresearcher: Improving automated research via automated review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00816 .Haixu Wu, Tengge Hu, Huakun Luo, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. 2023. Solving high-dimensional pdes with latent spectral models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.12664 .Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Sen-jie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. 2025. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey. Sci-ence China Information Sciences , 68(2):121101. Zekang Yang, Wang Zeng, Sheng Jin, Chen Qian, Ping Luo, and Wentao Liu. 2025. Autommlab: Automat-ically generating deployable models from language instructions for computer vision tasks. In Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 39, pages 22056–22064. Shujian Zhang, Chengyue Gong, Lemeng Wu, Xingchao Liu, and Mingyuan Zhou. 2023. Automl-gpt: Automatic machine learning with gpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02499 .Borui Zhao, Quan Cui, Renjie Song, Yiyu Qiu, and Jiajun Liang. 2022. Decoupled knowledge distilla-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11953–11962. 21930 A Appendix 

A.1 Execution Error Analysis 

A manual error analysis of code generated by both PaperCoder (Seo et al., 2025) and A UTO REPRO - 

> DUCE

reveals that the majority of issues stemmed from incorrect data shapes during internal model calculations. Intuitively, while LLMs can gener-ate specified network structures, achieving correct data flow without test data is challenging, particu-larly for complex architectures. For tasks involv-ing pre-trained models, it is often not possible to generate a completely correct model architecture implementation in a single attempts. This is mainly because LLMs still face minor challenges in accu-rately reproducing architectural implementations of common pre-trained models, for example, hidden layer dimensions and normalization layer config-urations. Although debugging resolves numerous errors, some issues persist, particularly when en-countering complex data flows. 

A.2 AUTO REPRODUCE Details 

For all the experiments conducted in the ex-periment section, AUTO REPRODUCE utilizes 

claude-3-5-sonnet-20240620 version as 

claude-3-5-sonnet backbone. In the code development phase of A UTO REPRODUCE , the code agent debugs the execution errors. We set the maximum debug tries to 20 for all the subphases in the code development phase. However, further debug attempts generally do not produce more executable code, as bugs are typically fixed within 5-8 iterations. The results are also denoted in Ta-ble 6. On the R EPRODUCE BENCH benchmark, the average cost for A UTO REPRODUCE to reproduce a single experiment is $ 1.87 when utilising the 

o3-mini as the LLM backbone. We execuate all the generated code on the Tesla A100 GPUs. The algorithm for paper lineage is provided in the Algorithm 1. 

A.3 REPRODUCE BENCH Details 

While our main text provides an overview of the research domain, datasets, and evaluation metrics integral to the R EPRODUCE BENCH , this section offers a more detailed exposition of these elements. 

A.3.1 Reference Code 

We count the total lines of code for this reference implementation and its associated preprocessing code. Also, statistics about whether pretrained 

Algorithm 1 Paper Lineage Algorithm  

> 1:

Input: Paper P; research agent RA ; code agent CA ; Integer k (default 3); Instructions I. 

> 2:

Output: Set of paper lineage elements 

Klineage . 

> 3:

Initialize Klineage . 

> 4:

{P1, ...P k} ← RA (P, k ). ▷ research agent identifies top-k relevant papers  

> 5:

for each paper Pi in {Pi, ...P k} do  

> 6:

Text i ← DownloadPaper( Pi). ▷ e.g., via ArXiv/Semantic Scholar API  

> 7:

(Si, Ui) ← RA (Text i). ▷ research agent extracts summary & repo URL  

> 8:

Ki ← Si. ▷ Initialize Ki with summary  

> 9:

if Ui is valid and accessible then  

> 10:

Repo i ← DownloadRepo( Ui). ▷ e.g., via GitHub API  

> 11:

Code i ← CA (Si, Repo i, I). ▷ code agent filters for relevant code  

> 12:

Ki ← ⟨ Si, Code i⟩. ▷ Update Ki to summary-code pair  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

Add Ki to Klineage . 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Return Klineage .models are loaded and the reference performance rerun by ourselves are conducted. The details are shown in Table 7. Due to potential differences between our rerun settings and the experimental setup originally used by the paper authors, the refer-ence performance may differ from the performance metric reported in their respective papers. The ref-erence performances that we utilize in calculating performance gap metrics are obtained by rerunning the code on Tesla A100 GPUs. 

A.3.2 Automatic Evaluation 

For the evaluation metric in the align-score, we utilize LLMs to judge the generated code from three aspects, including paper-level, code-level and mixed-level. The prompts provided to the judge LLM are generally long, requiring a pow-erful model for robust evaluations. Consequently, we employ o1 for this purpose. For each level, each reproduction requires approximately $ 0.5 for evaluation. Thus, an evaluation run to determine the align-score costs approximately $ 20 on R E-

> PRODUCE

BENCH . When evaluating the generated code in the repository (Qian et al., 2023), all the Python files are concatenated to form the gener-21931 Method Total Preprocess Preprocess Pretrained Evaluation Reference Lines Code Lines Model Metric Performance 

IEBins 1877 ✓ 320 ✗ δ < 1.25 0.8854 

iTransformer 610 ✓ 199 ✗ MSE 0.4008 

DKD 678 ✗ 0 ✓ Accuracy 74 .56 

SimVP 544 ✓ 161 ✗ MSE 26 .19 

HumanMAC 1196 ✓ 412 ✗ ADE 0.2195 

SFNet 805 ✓ 121 ✗ PSNR 39 .68 

LSM 403 ✓ 141 ✗ MSE 0.0074 

Swin-Unet 1218 ✓ 102 ✓ DSC 0.7309 

TDGNN-w 310 ✓ 21 ✗ Accuracy 0.7651 

TimeVAE 711 ✓ 69 ✗ Predictor 0.2083 

WCDM 935 ✓ 117 ✗ SSIM 0.7938 

BSPM 713 ✓ 221 ✗ Recall 0.1921 

DAT-S 2047 ✓ 163 ✗ PSNR 38 .48 

> Table 7: More details about R EPRODUCE BENCH . The Reference Performance is the rerun performance obtained by official implementations. We utilize them to calculate the performance gap.

ated code. Figure 10 denotes the prompt to extract 5 key points from the paper by utilizing o1 . Fig-ure 11 shows the prompt for paper-level evaluation and Figure 12 13 show the prompt for code-level evaluation. Figure 14 15 shows the prompt for mixed-level evaluation. The placeholder in each prompt is replaced with the corresponding content. 

A.4 Human Evaluation Details A.4.1 Evaluation Settings 

For the human evaluations, the evaluators are given the original papers, instructions, official implemen-tations, and generated ones. To reduce the work-load of human assessment, we simultaneously gen-erated summaries of the papers using LLMs, which helps to accelerate the evaluators’ understanding of the papers. We recruit 5 students for human evaluations, including 3 PhDs, 1 master and a se-nior undergraduate. All the evaluators are from the EECS-related majors. The overall instructions are like the prompts for mixed-level evaluation denoted in Figure ?? , ?? . The human evaluators should score the generated code through the completeness of the method, parameters and experiment pipeline with a maximum of 10, 5, and 5. The score cri-teria are similar to the mixed-level evaluations in Figure 14 and 15. The minimum and maximum scores only occur in extreme circumstances where the code is totally wrong or exactly correct. For each implementation, the evaluators need around 15-25 minutes for the evaluation. 

A.4.2 Human-Machine Score correlation 

To evaluate the correlation of the alignment score evaluated by the LLM judge and the human evalu-ation scores, we calculate the Pearson correlation coefficients of these two scores. We evaluate all three runs in the main experiments. Since there is no one-to-one correspondence between the above two scores, we calculate the correlation by compar-ing the three alignment scores against the single average human score for each task. The results in Table 8 demonstrate that the mixed-level score aligns the best with the human scores, which proves our proposed evaluation strategy. 

A.5 License Check 

AUTO REPRODUCE is a non-profit project intended solely for research purposes. In constructing the R EPRODUCE BENCH , we carefully curate the datasets, selecting only those licenses for research and downloading them in strict accordance with any specified requirements. For the paper and code, we have re-examined the ground-truth code for all papers and found that it is all under the MIT and Apache-2.0 licenses. The specific terms state that: Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the ’Software’), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, mod-ify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software. Secondly, we have screened the papers themselves, and their licenses 21932 Method LLM Paper-level Code-level Mixed-level 

AUTO REPRODUCE o3-mini 0.48 0.76 0.81 PaperCoder o3-mini 0.52 0.73 0.83 AUTO REPRODUCE Claude-3.5-Sonnet 0.49 0.71 0.78 ChatDev GPT-4o 0.37 0.79 0.81 

> Table 8: The human-machine score correlation between the human and alignment scores.

are CC BY-NC-ND (Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives International), which denotes they are free to: Share — copy and redistribute the ma-terial in any medium or format. Due to our non-profit nature, we comply with all the aforemen-tioned terms. Additionally, we analyze the lineage papers and code for A UTO REPRODUCE . Since the lineage papers are obtained via the ArXiv API, the permissions for papers on ArXiv fall under the fol-lowing licenses: • CC BY: Creative Commons Attribution • CC BY-SA: Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike • CC BY-NC-SA: Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike • CC BY-NC-ND: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives • CC Zero: No Rights Reserved Therefore, we comply with all the usage regu-lations given our non-commercial purpose. Fur-thermore, we have checked the corresponding code repositories and found that they all fall under the MIT License, Apache-2.0 licenses, and the BSD License. As our work only involves refactoring this code, our actions comply with its relevant require-ments. 21933 Input queries of A UTO REPRODUCE 

ARXIV_ID=’ArXiv ID’ TASK=’Task Name’ MODEL=’Model Name’ METRIC=’Evaluation Metric’ INSTRUCTION=f"""You are assigned an arXiv paper to replicate. You need to replicate the experiment conducted for {TASK} dataset. Utilizing {METRIC} as the evaluation metric. The dataset/checkpoints is under ’Relative Path’ 

Figure 3: The input quries of A UTO REPRODUCE . It contains the ARXIV ID to download the paper. TASK, MODEL and METRIC in the paper that need to be reproduced. 

Iterative dialogue template of LLM agents 

~~~~~~~~~ History: {history string} ~~~~~~~~~ Current Step: {step}, Phase: {phase} Task instructions: {current phase prompts} [Overall Objective] Your overall goal is to follow the instructions to replicate the method proposed in the paper. Instruction: {instruction}. To achieve the objective, start by conducting a literature review, learning relevant codes, and finally generating the method and experiment codes. {previous step feedback} {command instruction} {additional notes} When you are given commands that you can use, your reply must be selected from among the commands. Please produce a single command below: 

Figure 4: Prompt for the ADD command of code agent. 

Abbreviation prompts for Paper Lineage stage of the research agent 

Your task is to read the paper and identify the 3 most relevant papers from its references that help in understanding the paper’s contributions, including the proposed model architecture, experimental settings, and other details. These papers need to be in the same research field as the ones that need to be replicated. You need to infer the most relevant related works based on the information such as the position and name of the reference. Importantly, the name of the paper should be correct. Do not generate mismatched names. The selected papers must come from the references and be specific to the same research field as the paper, avoiding commonly cited works like ’Attention Is All You Need’. Also, do not add the paper in the instructions. Return the related works in the format: [’paper name 1’, ’paper name 2’, ...] with only paper names (author names should not be included). Add the most related work after reading using the following command: 

``` ADD\n<related code file>\n ``` 

where <related work list> is the list of related work in the reference, the item in the list should be the full name of the paper. ADD is just the word ADD. You can only use a single command per inference turn. Do not use more than one command per inference. If you use multiple commands, then only one of them will be executed, not both. 

Figure 5: Abbreviation prompts for Paper Lineage stage of the research agent 21934 Abbreviation prompts for Paper Lineage stage of the code agent 

You need to reproduce the {Task Instruction} experiment now. The code repository mentioned above is related to the target reproduction paper. Please filter out the code files that are helpful for the reproduction based on the instructions, and return the useful code files in the form of a list. For example, ``` python [’file1.py’, ’model/file2.py’] ``` . You should start from the most relevant code file. You could select related code files using the following command: 

``` ADD\n<related code file>\n ``` 

where <related code file> is the list of related code files in the given code repo, the item in the list should be the full name of the file path. ADD is just the word ADD. 

Figure 6: Abbreviation prompts for Paper Lineage stage of the code agent 

Code agent prompt for the EDIT command. 

You can edit code using the following command: 

``` EDIT\n N M\n<new code>\n ``` 

EDIT is the word EDIT, N is the first line index you want to replace, and M is the last line index you want to replace (everything in between will also be removed), and <new code> will be the new code that is replacing the old code. This command allows you to replace lines indexed n through m (n:m) of the current code with as many lines of new code as you want to add. This will be the primary way that you interact with code. You can only use a single command per inference turn. Do not use more than one command per inference. If you use multiple commands, then only one of them will be executed, not both. 

Figure 7: Prompt for the EDIT command of code agent. 21935 Abbreviation of human evaluation instructions. 

Standards for manual score evaluation 1. Overview & Objective You are acting as an expert evaluator to assess the quality and fidelity of LLM-generated code. Your task is to compare Generated Code against the official Reference Code (Ground Truth) for a specific research paper. Goal: Determine how accurately the generated code reproduces the specific methods, parameters, and experimental pipeline described in the paper and implemented in the reference code. 2. Scoring Criteria (Total: 20 Points) Please evaluate the code across three specific dimensions. Use the Reference Code as the absolute standard for correctness. A. Completeness of Method (Max 10 Points) Focus: Does the code implement the core modeling innovation, specific algorithms, network architecture, and loss functions? 0 - 1 Points (Total Difference): The core innovation is missing or completely incorrect. The code might implement a standard baseline (e.g., standard ResNet) instead of the paper’s proposed method, or the logic is fundamentally flawed and unrunnable. 2 - 4 Points (Unsimilar): The code attempts the method but misses critical components. Major modules are absent, or the mathematical logic (e.g., attention mechanism details, specific loss calculation) deviates significantly from the reference. 5 - 7 Points (Similar): The core concepts are present. The implementation captures the "essence" of the method, but there are noticeable inaccuracies, over-simplifications, or structural differences compared to the reference code. 8 - 9 Points (Roughly the Same): High fidelity. The logic and structure closely mirror the reference code. Differences are superficial (e.g., variable naming, modularization style) and do not affect the core functionality. 10 Points (Same): Functionally identical. The implementation of the key method is a near-perfect replica of the reference code logic. B. Parameters (Max 5 Points) Focus: Does the code use the correct hyperparameters, dimensions, and constants as specified in the reference code? 0 Points (Total Mismatch): Uses generic library defaults (e.g., ‘lr=1e-3‘, ‘hidden_dim=256‘) or random values that completely contradict the paper’s specific setup. 1 Point (Significant Deviation): Attempts to configure parameters, but critical architectural dimensions (e.g., number of layers, embedding sizes, distinct model depths) are incorrect relative to the reference. 2 Points (Partial Match): The model architecture parameters are mostly correct, but critical training hyperparameters (e.g., specific learning rate schedules, weight decay, optimizer betas) or loss coefficients are missing or wrong. 3 Points (Moderate Match): The majority of parameters (both model and training) align with the reference, but there are noticeable discrepancies in specific configuration details (e.g., wrong kernel size in a specific layer, incorrect temperature scaling value). 4 Points (High Fidelity): The configuration is nearly identical to the reference code. The discrepancies are negligible and non-critical (e.g., a slightly different buffer size or a different variable name for aconstant) that do not impact the main results. 5 Points (Exact Match): Perfect replication. The generated code strictly adheres to all hyperparameters, model dimensions, and configuration settings found in the reference code without any error. 

Figure 8: Prompt for human evaluation instructions. 21936 Abbreviation of human evaluation instructions. 

C. Experiment Pipeline (Max 5 Points) Focus: Is the data processing, training loop, and evaluation protocol correct? 0 Points (Broken / Wrong Task): The pipeline is non-functional, syntax-heavy errors prevent execution, or it solves a completely different task (e.g., generating a classification loop for a segmentation paper). 1 Point (Incorrect Data Handling): The training loop structure exists, but the data loading or input formatting is fundamentally wrong or hallucinated (e.g., using a fake dataset class that doesn’t exist or handling data dimensions incorrectly). 2 Points (Generic / Simplified): The code provides a standard "boilerplate" pipeline (standard loader → model → loss). It works, but misses all paper-specific customizations like specific data augmentations, sampling strategies, or preprocessing steps. 3 Points (Incomplete Protocol): The pipeline flow is correct and includes some specific steps, but misses critical evaluation metrics or specific evaluation procedures defined in the paper (e.g., using simple Accuracy instead of a specific mIoU calculation, or missing a required post-processing step). 4 Points (High Consistency): The pipeline is robust and follows the correct protocol (Data Load → Model → Loss → Metric). The logic matches the reference, with only minor deviations in non-critical areas like logging, random seed setting, or exact validation split ratios. 5 Points (Exact Replication): Perfect reproduction. The code includes specific preprocessing logic, exact data splits, specific augmentation pipelines, and metric calculations exactly as implemented in the reference code. 3. Evaluation Guidelines 1. Logic over Comments: Ignore comments in the code. Judge based on the executable logic/code statements. 2. Functional Equivalence: If the generated code achieves the same mathematical result as the reference but uses a slightly different coding style (e.g., 2 lines vs 1 line), consider it correct. 3. Strictness: Do not give full marks unless the implementation is rigorous. "Looking similar" is not enough for a max score; it must be "functionally equivalent. 4. Output Format Please provide your evaluation in the following format: Paper Title: Title Dimension: [Score](Justification (Briefly explain matches/discrepancies) Method: [**/10](**) Parameters: [**/5](**) Pipeline: [**/5](**) Total Score: **/20 

Figure 9: Prompt for human evaluation instructions. 21937 Prompt for summarizing 5 key points proposed in the paper 

TASK = MovingMnist METRIC = MSE TITLE = SimVP: Simpler yet Better Video Prediction PATH = bench/simvp/source INSTRUCTION = You are assigned an arXiv paper {TITLE} to replicate. You need to replicate the experiment conducted for {TASK} dataset in the paper. Training and testing datasets are under the folder {PATH}. Code related to processing the data is provided to you to obtain the dataset. Utilise {METRIC} as the evaluation metric. The provided text above is the full text of the paper. The instructions for reproducing the experiment are {INSTRUCTION} with the model {MODEL}. Now you will evaluate whether the code has replicated the instructions about {TASK} experiments in the paper. Please summarise 5 key points. These 5 key points will be used to assess whether the code has completely replicated the model, methods, and experimental setting in the paper. Specifically, you are preferred to use 3 key points to summarise the proposed method, 1 for hyperparameters and 1 for training setup. Do not include the dataset generation process as a point, as the dataset has been preprocessed. You should regard each part of the proposed method in the paper as a separate key point. If there are formulas in the paper, you need to extract them in LaTeX format and use them as the criteria for judging whether the code has been replicated. Do not include some common content as the key points to be compared. Only include the key points related to the {TASK} task. If all these 5 points are replicated exactly, the code will fully replicate the paper. These key points are very important and should be as detailed as possible, which could reflect the key points to reproduce the paper. 

Figure 10: Prompt for key points summarization. 

Prompt for paper-level evaluation 

Now, I’m presenting you with a generated code. You need to check whether the details of the code correspond to the key points. The experiment instructions for the generated code are {INSTRUCTION} You just need to consider the model, task, and dataset used in the instructions. There are a total of 5 comparison points, and each point is scored from 0 to 20. A score of 20 indicates perfect reproduction, while 0 means no reproduction at all. Please rate each of the 5 comparison points separately and provide the reasons. Points to compare {Points} Generated code {Generated Code} For each scoring criterion, you need to give a score between 0-20 points. The scoring criteria are as follows: Total difference: 0-2 points. Unsimilar: 3-8 points. Similar: 9-14 points. Roughly the same: 15-18 points. Same: 19-20 points. You need to evaluate with a critical perspective. Don’t give high scores to the mismatched content. Disregard all comments, as they do not pertain to the implementation of the code. The code needs to strictly correspond to the points. Any mismatched content should result in a deduction of points. The scores should be presented in the form of [x/20 points]. The final score should be the sum of the scores for each point. 

Figure 11: Prompt for paper-level score. The Points are the 5 key points generated by the LLM judge, and the Generated Code is the code generated by LLM Agents. 21938 Prompt for code-level evaluation 

You are an expert proficient in code analysis, specialising in comparing and evaluating code structure and functionality. Now you need to judge whether the replicated code is the same as the official code. Please analyse the following two code segments: the first is model-generated code, and the second is standard training code. You don’t need to pay attention to the contents related to saving, printing and logging. Focus on the model itself and its training process instead. Conclusion: Summarise whether the two code segments are completely equivalent in terms of model definition and Experimental Integrity, and briefly explain the significance of the scoring results. First Code Segment (Standard Experiment Code): {Reference Code} Second Code Segment (Model-Generated Code): {Generated Code} Your task is to conduct a detailed comparison of these two code segments, focusing on the following aspects: Overall Structure: The overall structure of the model code includes the data flow in the forward function and the overall model structure. Only consider the model-related code, such as the encoder-decoder structure, and ignore the data loading and other irrelevant code. Model Structure: Are the model architectures defined in both code segments (e.g., number of layers, activation functions, input/output dimensions) completely identical? Specifically compare the implementation details, such as if a spatio-temporal processing module is present in the code, including but not limited to input processing, feature extraction methods, temporal dimension handling, spatial dimension handling, connection methods (e.g., residual connections, attention mechanisms), and parameter settings. Apply this level of comparison to all modules. Check for any subtle differences (e.g., convolution kernel size, pooling methods, normalisation techniques). Training Details: Compare whether the model hyperparameters (e.g., learning rate, batch size, optimiser type, learning rate decay strategy) are consistent. Verify whether the loss function’s definition and implementation are identical, including the loss calculation formula and weight assignments. Experimental Integrity: Compare the implementation of the training process, including the training pipeline, data preprocessing, and gradient update logic, to determine if they are equivalent. The most crucial thing you need to pay attention to is the integrity of the experiment. Check for any functional differences (e.g., initialisation methods, early stopping mechanisms). There is no requirement for checkpoint saving, logging information and multi-GPU training. Do not consider these contents. Pay special attention to analysing the implementation of the module in the model structure, ensuring a detailed comparison of each layer’s specific parameters and computational logic. If differences are found, clearly indicate the specific code lines or modules where they occur and analyse their potential impact on model performance or behaviour. Ignore differences in code style (e.g., variable naming, comments) and focus on functionality and implementation logic. You need to focus on the code implementation and don’t need to consider comments and function names, and other contents irrelevant to the implementation. 

Figure 12: Prompt for code-level score. The Reference Code and Generated Code are our curated official implemen-tations and Agents’ generated code, respectively. 21939 Prompt for code-level evaluation 

Scoring Criteria (Total: 100 points): Overall Structure (25 points): Consistency in the overall structure of the model-related code, including the overall data flow pipeline in the forward function, and the overall modules are structured. Model Details (25 points): Consistency in the implementation of the model structure. All the layers should be compared. If the names are different but the internal functions are the same, you should consider them as the same. Training Details (25 points): Consistency in hyperparameters, loss function, learning rate decay, etc. Experimental Integrity (25 points): Consistency in training loop, data processing, and other pipeline. You just need to compare the training, testing pipeline included in the code. You need to analyse the code details and implementation before giving the score. Firstly, analyse the overall structure of the model and then analyse it specifically for each module. For custom blocks, the details of how custom blocks are implemented should be analysed. For some official implementation, you need to analyse whether the implementation of custom is the same as the official one based on your understanding. Ignoring the differences of programming languages and only considering the code implementation. For each scoring criterion, you need to give a score between 0-25 points. The scoring criteria are as follows: Total difference: 0-4 points. Unsimilar: 5-10 points. Similar: 12-16 points. Roughly the same: 17-22 points. Same: 23-25 points. The MLP and a single linear layer should be considered roughly the same. Similarly, when the functions of two codes are the same, but the implementations are different. Unsimilar should be when the functions of two codes are different. You need to analyse the specific implementation of the code, do not just focus on the name. Make detailed evaluations based on the details. Ignore all the comments and focus only on the code. The scores should be presented in the form of [x/25 points]. The final score should be the sum of the scores for each point. 

Figure 13: Prompt for code-level score. The Reference Code and Generated Code are our curated official implemen-tations and Agents’ generated code, respectively. 21940 Prompt for mixed-level evaluation 

You are an expert code reviewer specialising in evaluating the fidelity of research paper implementations. Your task is to meticulously compare the generated code against a set of key points from a research paper. Crucially, you will use the provided reference code as the ground truth to understand how each key point is specifically and correctly implemented. The experiment instruction is {INSTRUCTION} You just need to consider the model, task, and dataset used in the instructions. Inputs You Will Be Provided With: 1. Points: A list of key concepts, mechanisms, algorithms, or architectural features from the research paper that the generated code is supposed to implement. 2. Reference code: The official source code accompanying the research paper. This code serves as the benchmark for understanding the precise, intended implementation details of each key point. 3. Generated code: The generated code that needs to be evaluated for its accuracy in reproducing the key points as they are implemented in the reference code. Your Evaluation Process: 1. Understand Key Point via Reference Code: For each key point, first, thoroughly examine the reference code. Identify and describe the specific segments of the reference code (e.g., functions, classes, logic blocks) that implement this key point. Summarize how the reference code realizes this key point. This understanding will be your basis for comparison. 2. Analyse Generated Code against Reference Implementation:Now, review the generated code (generated code) to find its implementation of the same key point. Compare this implementation directly against your understanding of how it was done in the reference code. Focus on whether the logic, structure, and functional outcome are equivalent. 3. Score the Replication: Based on your comparative analysis, assign a score from 0 to 20 to the generated code for its replication of this specific key point, using the scoring rubric below. 4. Provide Detailed Justification: Clearly articulate the reasons for your score. Specifically highlight matches and discrepancies between the generated code’s implementation and the reference code’s implementation of the key point. Explain why it matches or why it deviates. Scoring Rubric: 0-2 points (Total difference): The core innovation point (as demonstrated in the reference code) is not replicated at all in the generated code, or the implementation is fundamentally flawed, missing major functional aspects, or entirely incorrect when compared to the reference code. 3-8 points (Unsimilar): The key point is replicated in the generated code, but not completely accurately or comprehensively when compared to the reference code. Some aspects of the reference code’s implementation might be present, but there are noticeable inaccuracies, missing details, or differences in logic that might affect functionality or deviate from the paper’s intended mechanism, as shown in the official code. 9-14 points (Similar): The key point is replicated completely and accurately in the generated code. The implementation in the generated code closely mirrors the logic, structure, and functional behavior of the corresponding implementation in the reference code, although there might be some non-critical differences or alternative approaches that achieve the same core outcome. 15-18 points (Roughly the same): The key point is replicated completely, accurately, and comprehensively in the generated code. The implementation is highly consistent with the reference code in logic, structure, and function, differing only in very minor, non-functional ways that do not impact the core mechanism. 19-20 points (Same): The implementation of the key point in the generated code is identical or functionally equivalent to the reference code, representing a code-level copy or a near-perfect replication of the relevant sections. 

Figure 14: Prompt for mixed-level score. The Reference Code and Generated Code are our curated official implementations and Agents’ generated code, respectively. 21941 Prompt for mixed-level evaluation 

Critical Evaluation Guidelines: Conduct your evaluation with a stringent and critical perspective. Do not award high scores for superficial similarities or implementations that do not match the essence of the reference code’s approach for a given key point. Your evaluation must be based solely on the executable code logic. Disregard all comments in both the reference code and the generated code as they do not pertain to the functional implementation. At the same time, you need to pay attention not only to the key points themselves, but also to all the details related to them. If the key points correspond but the related implementations are different, it will still affect the reproduction effect. Please evaluate each key point in the points with the generated code. You should both determine the overall similarity and concrete scores. For example, when you decide the two codes are similar, you should also determine the level of similarity. When evaluating specific implementations, prioritise the equivalence of core structure and function over superficial differences, such as the number of modules. If generated code achieves the same functional outcome and structural design as the reference, it should be considered equivalent, irrespective of modular composition. Begin Evaluation: Points to compare:{points} Reference Code:{Reference Code} Generated code:{Generated Code} Output Format: For each key point, please provide: 1. Key Point:*[Name/Description of the key point being evaluated] 2. Reference Code Implementation Summary:*[Your summary of how this key point is implemented in the reference code] 3. Generated Code Analysis & Comparison:*[Your detailed analysis of the generated code’s attempt to implement this point, comparing it directly to the reference code’s approach] 4. Score:*[x/20 points] 5. Reasoning for Score:*[Detailed justification based on the comparison] Sum the overall scores for each key point to provide a final score out of 100 points, and include a summary of the overall evaluation. Overall Score:*[x/100 points] 

Figure 15: Prompt for mixed-level score. The Reference Code and Generated Code are our curated official implementations and Agents’ generated code, respectively. 21942