Title: Hypothesis-Driven Deep Research with Large Language Models: A Structured Methodology for Automated Knowledge Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10224v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 02:24:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Hypothesis-Driven Deep Research with Large Language Models: A Structured Methodology for Automated Knowledge Discovery 

## Michael Chin 

## Independent Researcher 

## 40185353@qq.com 

# Abstract 

Current AI-powered research systems—from commercial platforms such as Gemini Deep Re-search and ChatGPT Deep Research to academic frameworks like POPPER and HypoAgents— adopt a direct search-then-summarize paradigm that treats hypotheses as end products of scien-tific discovery. We argue that this treatment leaves a critical methodological gap: hypothe-ses can serve a far more powerful role as or-ganizational instruments that structure the re-search process itself. Drawing on this insight, we propose the Hypothesis-Driven Deep Research (hdri ) methodology—to our knowl-edge, the first framework that uses hypothe-ses to organize general-purpose deep research across arbitrary domains, rather than to gener-ate or validate scientific claims within specific do-mains. This distinction—hypotheses as organi-zational instruments versus scientific outputs— transforms the research process from reactive information retrieval into proactive, verifiable, and iterative knowledge discovery. We formalize 

hdri with six core principles and implement it as an eight-stage pipeline. A central innovation is the gap-driven iterative research mechanism— to our knowledge, the first closed-loop quality assurance mechanism for AI research systems— which automatically identifies informational and logical gaps and triggers targeted supplemen-tary investigation. We further introduce a fact reasoning framework with traceable reasoning chains and quantified confidence propagation, a subject locking mechanism that prevents entity confusion, and a multi-dimensional quality as-sessment scheme. The methodology is realized in the InfoMiner system with 24 core algo-rithms. Experiments demonstrate improvements of 22.4% in fact density, 90% subject match-ing accuracy, 0.92 multi-source verification con-fidence, and 14% completeness gain from gap-driven supplementation. Five case studies vali-date practical applicability with an average qual-ity rating of 4.46/5.0. 

Keywords: Hypothesis-Driven Research; AI Agent; Large Language Models; Fact Reason-ing; Cross-Validation; Automated Knowledge Discovery 

# 1 Introduction 

The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has fundamentally altered how humans access and process information. Commercial systems— ChatGPT, Gemini, Perplexity AI—have demon-strated impressive capabilities in question an-swering, summarization, and information re-trieval. Yet when these systems are applied to deep research tasks, which demand system-atic investigation, multi-source verification, and structured reasoning over complex topics, they exhibit limitations that are not merely engineer-ing imperfections but reflect a deeper method-ological deficiency. 1

> arXiv:2605.10224v1 [cs.AI] 11 May 2026

The prevailing paradigm in AI research tools can be described as direct search-then-summarize : given a user query, the system re-trieves relevant documents and synthesizes asummary response. This approach, while ade-quate for straightforward factual queries, suffers from three structural shortcomings: 1. Absence of structured guidance. With-out prior hypotheses or a research frame-work, the search process remains reactive— gathering information rather than investigat-ing it. The result is often broad but shallow coverage of complex topics. 2. No systematic quality assurance. Ex-isting systems rarely implement fact verifica-tion with quantified confidence, leaving users unable to assess the reliability of individual claims within a generated report. 3. Incomplete coverage without self-correction. The absence of self-evaluation mechanisms means that informational gaps and logical inconsistencies in preliminary findings go undetected and therefore unad-dressed. These shortcomings are not incidental; they reflect a methodological void. The scientific tradition has long recognized that rigorous in-quiry proceeds through hypothesis-driven inves-tigation —formulating testable conjectures, de-signing targeted investigations, and iteratively refining conclusions based on evidence [1, 2]. This methodology, which has driven scientific progress for centuries, is conspicuously absent from current AI research systems. In this paper, we bridge this gap by propos-ing the Hypothesis-Driven Deep Research 

(hdri ) methodology, which systematically inte-grates the hypothesis-testing tradition into AI-powered research workflows. Our central in-sight distinguishes hdri from all prior work: while recent academic systems treat hypothe-ses as end products of scientific discovery— POPPER [3] validates hypotheses through falsi-fication experiments, HypoAgents [4] refines hy-potheses through Bayesian updates— hdri treats hypotheses as an organizational instrument for structuring the research process itself. This dis-tinction is consequential: it enables the method-ology to apply to general-purpose deep research across arbitrary domains—from business intel-ligence to policy analysis—rather than being confined to domain-specific scientific discovery. By generating structured hypotheses before con-ducting research, we transform the process from undirected information retrieval into focused, verifiable, and iterative knowledge discovery. The hdri methodology rests on six princi-ples: (1) goal orientation —maintaining clear research objectives throughout; (2) hypothesis primacy —using hypotheses to guide all sub-sequent research activities; (3) subject lock-ing —ensuring search and analysis remain fo-cused on the target entity; (4) multi-source verification —cross-validating facts across inde-pendent sources; (5) gap-driven supplementa-tion —automatically identifying and filling in-formational gaps; and (6) confidence quantifi-cation —assigning and propagating confidence scores throughout the reasoning chain. We implement this methodology as an eight-stage research pipeline and realize it in the In-foMiner system, which incorporates 24 core algorithms spanning query understanding, hy-pothesis generation, research planning, intelli-gent search, fact extraction, analytical reason-ing, cross-validation, and report generation. Adistinguishing feature is the gap-driven iterative research mechanism: after completing an initial research cycle, the system automatically identi-fies logical and informational gaps and triggers targeted supplementary research, progressively improving research completeness. Our main contributions are: 1. A novel research methodology. We pro-pose hdri —the first systematic framework that integrates scientific hypothesis-testing into general-purpose AI research workflows. Unlike academic systems that use hypothe-ses for scientific discovery in specific do-mains (POPPER for hypothesis falsification, HypoAgents for Bayesian hypothesis refine-ment), hdri treats hypotheses as an organiza-

2tional instrument for structuring the research process itself, making it applicable across ar-bitrary research domains. The methodology is formalized with six principles and an eight-stage pipeline architecture. 2. Gap-driven iterative research. We in-troduce a gap-driven iterative research mech-anism that automatically identifies informa-tional and logical gaps in preliminary find-ings and triggers targeted supplementary in-vestigations. This provides closed-loop qual-ity assurance—a capability absent from all current commercial deep research platforms (Gemini Deep Research, ChatGPT Deep Re-search, Perplexity Pro Search) and academic systems, which operate in an open-loop fash-ion without self-evaluation. 3. Fact reasoning with confidence propa-gation. We develop a fact reasoning frame-work that derives implicit facts from explicit evidence with traceable reasoning chains and quantified confidence propagation (Eq. 4), alongside a multi-dimensional quality assess-ment scheme for search results and a subject locking mechanism that prevents entity con-fusion. No existing commercial or academic system provides quantified confidence scores that propagate through reasoning chains. 4. Complete system implementation and evaluation. We implement the methodology in InfoMiner with 24 core algorithms and evaluate it through extensive experiments, demonstrating improvements of 22.4% in fact density, 90% subject matching accuracy, 0.92 multi-source verification confidence, and 14% completeness gain from gap-driven supple-mentation over direct search baselines. The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-lows. Section 2 reviews related work. Section 3 presents the hdri methodology. Section 4 de-tails the core algorithms. Section 5 describes the system architecture. Section 6 presents experi-mental results. Section 7 discusses case studies. Section 8 concludes with future directions. 

# 2 Related Work 

## 2.1 AI Agent Workflows and Orches-tration 

The concept of AI agents—autonomous systems that perceive, reason, and act—has deep roots in artificial intelligence [5]. Recent advances in LLMs have revitalized this field, enabling agents that decompose complex tasks, use tools, and execute multi-step reasoning chains. The Re-Act framework [6] demonstrated that interleav-ing reasoning and acting significantly improves task performance across diverse domains. Chain-of-Thought prompting [7] showed that eliciting step-by-step reasoning in LLMs enhances their problem-solving capabilities on arithmetic, com-monsense, and symbolic reasoning tasks. Build-ing on these foundations, the Reflexion frame-work [8] introduced self-reflection mechanisms that allow agents to learn from prior failures. On the systems side, LangChain and Lang-Graph have popularized workflow orchestration patterns for LLM-based applications, provid-ing abstractions for chain composition, memory management, and tool integration. The Au-toGPT and AgentGPT projects explored au-tonomous goal-directed behavior, though they often struggle with task drift and lack of fo-cus. The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [9] has emerged as a standardized interface for connect-ing AI assistants with external data sources and tools. However, existing agent frameworks primarily focus on task decomposition and tool use , without incorporating the methodological rigor of scien-tific research. They lack mechanisms for gen-erating research hypotheses a priori, planning verification-oriented search strategies, and iter-atively refining conclusions based on evidence gaps. Our work extends the agent paradigm by introducing hypothesis-driven research as a first-class organizational principle for multi-step research workflows. 32.2 LLM-Based Research and Analy-sis Tools 

A growing ecosystem of AI-powered research tools has emerged in both commercial and aca-demic domains. Perplexity AI provides real-time web search with synthesized answers and inline citations, achieving approximately 94.3% citation accuracy with response times under 60 seconds [10]. Gemini Deep Research (pow-ered by Gemini 2.5 Pro) creates multi-step re-search plans, browses 100+ web pages per query, and produces structured reports exportable to Google Docs, with typical completion times of 5–15 minutes [11]. ChatGPT Deep Research 

(powered by the o3 reasoning model) applies extended thinking with iterative browsing, pro-ducing detailed analytical reports in 10–25 min-utes with 20–60+ cited sources [12]. Academic tools such as Elicit, Semantic Scholar, and Re-search Rabbit assist with literature discovery, paper summarization, and citation network ex-ploration. While these tools represent significant progress, they share three fundamental limita-tions that our work addresses: 1. No hypothesis-structured inquiry. Com-mercial systems decompose queries into sub-questions or research plans, but these are re-active decompositions—they determine what to search for, not why . A hypothesis provides a verification criterion: it specifies what ev-idence would confirm or refute a claim, en-abling systematic assessment of research suc-cess. Without hypotheses, the research pro-cess lacks an organizational backbone for eval-uating whether findings adequately address the original question. 2. No self-evaluation or gap-driven iter-ation. All commercial systems operate in a single-pass or fixed-iteration mode. After completing their research cycle, they produce output without evaluating whether all aspects of the research question have been adequately addressed. No existing system automatically identifies informational and logical gaps and triggers targeted supplementary research. 3. No quantified confidence with propaga-tion. Commercial systems provide source ci-tations but do not assign confidence scores to individual facts or propagate these scores through reasoning chains. Users cannot dis-tinguish between well-supported conclusions and speculative inferences within the same re-port. 

## 2.3 Automated Scientific Discovery 

The automation of scientific discovery has been a long-standing aspiration in AI [13]. Notable suc-cesses include AlphaFold [14] for protein struc-ture prediction, AI-driven drug discovery sys-tems, and materials science platforms. Recent work has explored using LLMs for automated hy-pothesis generation in scientific domains [15], ex-perimental design [16], and literature-based dis-covery. The AI Scientist framework [17] demonstrated end-to-end automated research, from idea gen-eration to paper writing, though focused on ma-chine learning research specifically. The DeepRe-search system [18] proposed iterative retrieval-reasoning for complex question answering. More recently, several hypothesis-centric frameworks have emerged. POPPER [3] intro-duces an agentic framework for automated vali-dation of free-form hypotheses using LLM agents that design falsification experiments, inspired by Karl Popper’s falsification principle. Hy-poAgents [4] proposes a multi-agent Bayesian framework for hypothesis generation and refine-ment, incorporating information entropy-driven mechanisms to reduce uncertainty. Curie [19] presents an AI agent framework for automating scientific experimentation with an Experimental Rigor Engine. AUTODISCOVERY [20] uses Bayesian surprise and Monte Carlo tree search for open-ended scientific discovery from datasets. Our work differs from these approaches in three fundamental ways. First, scope :while POPPER, HypoAgents, Curie, and AU-TODISCOVERY focus on scientific discovery —generating and validating hypotheses within spe-cific scientific domains using experimental or dataset-driven methods—we focus on general-

4purpose deep research : the systematic investiga-tion of arbitrary topics through web-scale infor-mation retrieval and reasoning. Second, method-ology : existing systems treat hypothesis gener-ation as an end product (a scientific contribu-tion), whereas we treat hypotheses as an organi-zational instrument that structures the research process itself. Third, completeness assurance : no existing system implements gap-driven iterative research—the automatic identification of infor-mational and logical gaps with targeted supple-mentary investigation—which is our key mecha-nism for ensuring research completeness. 

## 2.4 Fact Verification and Knowledge Reasoning 

Fact verification has received considerable atten-tion in NLP, with datasets like FEVER [21] driv-ing progress in claim verification against textual evidence. Multi-hop reasoning datasets such as HotpotQA [22] require integrating information from multiple documents. Knowledge graph rea-soning methods enable inference over structured knowledge bases through link prediction and log-ical rule learning [23]. Recent work on retrieval-augmented genera-tion (RAG) [24] has improved the factual accu-racy of LLM outputs by grounding generation in retrieved evidence. Self-RAG [25] further intro-duced self-reflective mechanisms for adaptive re-trieval. The WebGPT system [26] demonstrated that training LLMs to browse the web can im-prove factual accuracy through evidence-based answers. Our fact reasoning framework extends these approaches in several ways. First, we introduce 

traceable reasoning chains that explicitly con-nect each derived (implicit) fact to its eviden-tial basis and reasoning logic. Second, we imple-ment confidence propagation that quantifies the reliability of derived conclusions based on both source reliability and reasoning strength. Third, our cross-validation mechanism systematically corroborates facts across multiple independent sources, with a dedicated contradiction detection module that identifies and resolves conflicting information—including temporal conflicts where facts from different time periods may appear contradictory but actually reflect temporal evo-lution. 

## 2.5 Information Retrieval and Query Understanding 

Query understanding is a foundational compo-nent of modern search systems [27]. Intent clas-sification, entity recognition, and query expan-sion are well-studied problems in information re-trieval. Recent neural approaches have improved query understanding through contextual embed-dings and pre-trained language models [28]. Our query understanding module extends tra-ditional approaches by incorporating temporal context extraction —identifying time-related in-tent and computing appropriate temporal con-straints for search queries—and complexity as-sessment —estimating the research depth re-quired based on query characteristics. These ca-pabilities are particularly important for research queries, which often contain implicit temporal constraints and vary widely in complexity. 

# 3 The hdri Methodology 

## 3.1 Problem Formulation 

We formalize the deep research problem as fol-lows. Given a research query q and an optional set of reference materials R, the objective is to produce a structured research report R that maximizes three properties: 

Definition 3.1 (Research Quality Triple) . The quality of a research output R for query q is char-acterized by: 

• Completeness C(R, q ) ∈ [0 , 1] : the degree to which R covers all aspects relevant to q;

• Accuracy A(R) ∈ [0 , 1] : the proportion of facts in R that are verifiably correct; 

• Traceability T (R) ∈ [0 , 1] : the degree to which each claim in R can be traced to its evidential source. 

5The goal is to find: 

R∗ = arg max  

> R

[α · C (R, q ) + β · A (R) + γ · T (R)] 

(1) where α, β, γ are weighting coefficients reflecting the relative importance of each quality dimen-sion, with α + β + γ = 1 .

Definition 3.2 (Research Query) . Aresearch query is formalized as Q =

⟨text , type , domain , constraints , context ⟩ where text is the natural language query, type ∈

{Fact , Trend , Comparison , Causal , Pre-diction , Comprehensive }, domain identifies the knowledge area, constraints specify temporal and scope limitations, and context provides user background. 

Definition 3.3 (Research Hypothesis) . A re-search hypothesis is a structured tuple Hk =

⟨sk, r k, v k, e k, σ k, τ k⟩ where sk is the hypothesis statement, rk the supporting rationale, vk the verification method, ek the expected outcomes, 

σk ∈ [0 , 1] the current confidence score, and 

τk ∈ {Unverified , Partial , Confirmed , Re-futed } the verification status. 

## 3.2 Core Principles 

The hdri methodology is founded on six princi-ples that collectively address the limitations of direct search-then-summarize approaches: 1. Goal Orientation. Every research activ-ity must be traceable to the original research objective. This prevents the common failure mode where AI systems drift away from the core question during extended multi-step re-search processes. Formally, for each research step si, there must exist a mapping ϕ(si) → oj

where oj is a research objective derived from 

q.2. Hypothesis Primacy. Research hypothe-ses are generated before conducting searches, and all subsequent research activities are or-ganized around hypothesis verification. This transforms the research process from reactive information retrieval into proactive, struc-tured inquiry. Each hypothesis hk is a struc-tured tuple containing a statement, rationale, verification method, and expected outcomes: 

hk = ⟨sk, r k, v k, e k⟩ (2) where sk is the hypothesis statement, rk the rationale, vk the verification method, and ek

the expected outcomes. 3. Subject Locking. Throughout the research process, all search queries and analytical op-erations must remain focused on the target subject entity. This prevents a critical failure mode where search results about entities with similar names or related but distinct topics contaminate the research output. We imple-ment this through a SubjectMatcher compo-nent that computes subject relevance scores for search results and extracted facts. 4. Multi-Source Verification. Facts must be corroborated across multiple independent sources to establish reliability. For a fact f

with source set Sf , the verification confidence is: conf (f ) = |{ s ∈ Sf : s confirms f }| |{ s ∈ Sf : s addresses f }| (3) 5. Gap-Driven Supplementation. After completing an initial research cycle, the sys-tem must automatically identify informa-tional and logical gaps and trigger targeted supplementary research. This principle en-sures progressive improvement in research completeness through iterative refinement. 6. Confidence Quantification. Every fact and derived conclusion must carry a quanti-fied confidence score that reflects its reliabil-ity. Confidence scores propagate through the reasoning chain: if fact f3 is derived from f1

and f2 with reasoning strength r, then: conf (f3) = r · min( conf (f1), conf (f2)) (4) 

## 3.3 Eight-Stage Research Pipeline 

Based on these principles, we design an eight-stage research pipeline that transforms a user 6query into a structured, verified research report. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture. 

Stage 1: Query Understanding. The sys-tem analyzes the user’s research query to iden-tify the query type (factual, trend analysis, com-parative, causal, predictive, or comprehensive), extract temporal context, recognize key entities, assess complexity, and recommend an appropri-ate research strategy. This stage produces a structured understanding U(q) that parameter-izes all subsequent stages. 

Stage 2: Hypothesis Generation. Based on the query understanding and any provided reference materials, the system generates 3–5 structured research hypotheses. Each hypoth-esis follows the tuple structure in Eq. 2, provid-ing a clear statement, supporting rationale, veri-fication method, and expected outcomes. These hypotheses serve as the organizational backbone for the entire research process. 

Stage 3: Research Planning. For each hy-pothesis, the system designs a verification plan consisting of targeted search tasks. Each task specifies the search queries, target data sources, and the hypothesis it aims to verify. The plan-ning algorithm prioritizes tasks based on hypoth-esis importance and verification feasibility, pro-ducing a structured research plan P.

Stage 4: Intelligent Search. The system executes the research plan through multi-source search with query optimization, time-aware fil-tering, and result quality assessment. The query optimizer generates multiple query variants in-corporating temporal constraints, domain re-strictions, and advanced search syntax. Results are evaluated using a four-dimensional quality scoring scheme (relevance, authority, freshness, completeness) and filtered through the subject locking mechanism. 

Stage 5: Fact Extraction. From the search results, the system extracts structured facts us-ing LLM-based extraction with subject consis-tency checking. Each fact is represented as a tu-ple f = ⟨content , source , timestamp , confidence ⟩

and validated against the target subject to pre-vent entity confusion. 

Stage 6: Analytical Reasoning. This stage performs three critical operations: (a) fact reasoning —deriving implicit facts from explicit evidence through logical inference with traceable reasoning chains; (b) cross-validation —verifying facts across multiple sources and computing con-fidence scores; and (c) contradiction detection —identifying and resolving conflicting information, including temporal conflicts. The gap identifica-tion module analyzes the current fact base for logical and informational gaps. 

Stage 7: Report Generation. The sys-tem synthesizes all verified facts, derived con-clusions, and knowledge graph structures into a structured research report. The report includes a coverage matrix that maps each research require-ment to its coverage status (covered, partial, or missing), and a gap analysis section that identi-fies remaining uncertainties and suggests direc-tions for further investigation. 

Stage 8: Persistent Distribution. The final report, along with all intermediate arti-facts (hypotheses, search results, facts, knowl-edge graph), is persisted to a database for fu-ture reference and distributed through config-ured channels. 

## 3.4 Gap-Driven Iterative Research 

A key innovation of the hdri methodology is the gap-driven iterative research mechanism. After Stage 6 completes its initial analysis, the system evaluates the research completeness by identify-ing two types of gaps: 

Definition 3.4 (Research Gap) .

A research gap g is a tuple 

⟨name , type , importance , reason , queries ⟩ where: 

• type ∈ {Logical , Informational }: a log-ical gap indicates missing reasoning links be-tween known facts; an informational gap in-dicates missing facts required to support or re-fute a hypothesis. 

• importance ∈ {High , Medium , Low }: the estimated impact of the gap on research con-clusion reliability. 

• queries : a set of targeted search queries de-signed to address the gap. 

7Query Understand.        

> Hypothesis Generation
> Research Planning
> Intelligent Search
> Fact Extraction
> Analytical Reasoning
> Report Generation
> Persistent Distrib.
> Gap-driven iteration
> Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Stage 5 Stage 6 Stage 7 Stage 8

Figure 1: The eight-stage hdri research pipeline. The dashed red arrow indicates the gap-driven iterative feedback loop from Stage 6 (Analytical Reasoning) back to Stage 4 (Intelligent Search), which triggers supplementary research when informational or logical gaps are identified.  

> Initial Research
> Gap Analysis
> Gaps?
> Supplementary Search
> Final Report
> Yes No

Figure 2: Gap-driven iterative research process. After initial research, the system identifies gaps and triggers supplementary searches. The loop continues until no significant gaps remain. The gap identification algorithm analyzes the current fact base F against the research hypothe-ses H and produces a prioritized list of gaps. Only gaps with High or Medium importance trigger supplementary research, and the number of supplementary queries is bounded (typically 

≤ 4) to control computational cost. The supple-mentary search results are incrementally merged with the existing fact base, and confidence scores are updated accordingly. Figure 2 illustrates the gap-driven iterative re-search process. This iterative mechanism provides adaptive depth control : the system automatically deter-mines how much additional research is needed based on the quality of initial findings, rather than relying on a fixed depth parameter. The process terminates when no high-importance gaps remain or the iteration budget is exhausted. 

## 3.5 Subject Locking Mechanism 

A critical challenge in multi-source research is 

entity confusion : when the target subject shares a name with unrelated entities, search results may include irrelevant information that con-taminates the research output. To address this, we introduce a SubjectMatcher component that enforces subject consistency throughout the pipeline. The SubjectMatcher operates at two stages: 1. Search filtering: After retrieving search re-sults, the SubjectMatcher computes a subject relevance score ρ(s, e ) ∈ [0 , 1] for each result 

s against the target entity e. Results with 

ρ < θ s (typically θs = 0 .5) are discarded. 2. Fact validation: During fact extraction, each extracted fact is checked for subject con-sistency. Facts about unrelated entities are flagged and removed from the fact base. The subject relevance score is computed as a hybrid of lexical matching and semantic similar-ity: 

ρ(s, e ) = λ · lex (s, e ) + (1 − λ) · sem (s, e ) (5) where λ = 0.4 balances lexical precision and semantic coverage. This mechanism is particu-larly important for person investigation queries, where our experiments show it filters approxi-mately 12% of irrelevant search results. 

## 3.6 Comparison with Existing Paradigms 

Table 1 summarizes the fundamental differ-ences between the direct search-then-summarize 8paradigm, current commercial deep research platforms, and our hypothesis-driven approach. The key distinction is that existing systems— whether simple search-then-summarize pipelines or sophisticated commercial deep research platforms—operate in an open-loop fashion: they execute a fixed research cycle without self-evaluation. Gemini Deep Research and Chat-GPT Deep Research represent significant ad-vances in multi-step browsing and source cov-erage (100+ pages per query for Gemini), but they lack three critical capabilities that hdri 

provides: 1. Hypothesis-structured inquiry. Com-mercial platforms generate research plans or decompose queries into sub-questions, but these are reactive decompositions rather than 

proactive hypotheses. A research plan an-swers “what to search for,” while a hypoth-esis answers “what to search for and why ”— providing a verification criterion that enables systematic assessment of whether the research has succeeded. 2. Gap-driven self-evaluation. No existing commercial platform implements automatic gap identification and targeted supplemen-tary research. After completing their re-search cycle, these systems produce output without evaluating whether all aspects of the research question have been adequately ad-dressed. Our gap-driven mechanism provides 

closed-loop quality assurance. 3. Quantified confidence with propaga-tion. Commercial systems provide source ci-tations but do not assign or propagate confi-dence scores through reasoning chains. This means users cannot distinguish between well-supported conclusions and speculative infer-ences within the same report. 

# 4 Core Algorithms 

In this section, we present the key algorithms that realize the hdri methodology. We organize them according to the pipeline stages and high-light the novel contributions at each stage. 

## 4.1 Query Understanding 

The query understanding module analyzes a user query q to produce a structured understanding 

U(q) that parameterizes all subsequent stages. 

4.1.1 Intent Classification 

We define six query intent types that cover the spectrum of research queries: Fact-Query (seeking specific facts), TrendAnal-ysis (analyzing temporal patterns), Compari-son (comparing entities), CausalAnalysis (in-vestigating cause-effect relationships), Predic-tion (forecasting future outcomes), and Com-prehensive (multi-faceted investigation). The classification is performed by an LLM-based clas-sifier with a structured prompt that maps the query to one of these types along with a confi-dence score. 

4.1.2 Temporal Context Extraction 

For time-sensitive queries, we extract temporal context through a rule-based + LLM hybrid ap-proach. Seven categories of temporal keywords are detected: Current , Recent , ThisYear ,

Future , Past , After , and Before . For rela-tive temporal expressions (e.g., “recently”), the system computes concrete date ranges based on the current date. For example, “recently” maps to the past 3 months, while “this year” maps to January 1 of the current year to the present. 

4.1.3 Complexity Assessment and Strat-egy Recommendation 

Query complexity is assessed along three dimensions—breadth (number of aspects cov-ered), depth (level of detail required), and tem-poral span—producing a composite complexity score σ(q) ∈ [0 , 1] . Based on the intent type and complexity score, the system recommends research parameters including maximum search depth dmax , number of parallel tasks ntasks , and search strategy (e.g., MultiStepResearch for comprehensive queries, TemporalAnalysis for trend queries). 9Table 1: Comparison of research paradigms and systems. GDR = Gemini Deep Research; CDR = ChatGPT Deep Research; PPX = Perplexity Pro Search.                                     

> Dimension Direct Search GDR /CDR PPX hdri (Ours)
> Research guide None Research plan None Hypotheses Search strat-egy Reactive Multi-step Real-time RAG Proactive, planned Quality assur-ance None Limited Inline cita-tions Multi-source cross-val. Completeness Single-pass Multi-pass Single-pass Gap-driven iteration Fact reasoning Direct ex-tract. LLM synthe-sis LLM synthe-sis Implicit de-riv.+trace Confidence Not quanti-fied Not quanti-fied Not quanti-fied Propagated scores Subject lock-ing None None None SubjectMatcher Contradiction Not detected Not detected Not detected Detected +resolved Traceability Weak Footnotes Inline links Full reason-ing chain

Algorithm 1 Hypothesis Generation 

Require: Query q, references R, LLM L

Ensure: Hypothesis set H 

> 1:

Construct prompt P from hypothesis tem-plate with q and R 

> 2:

response ← L (P, temperature = 0 .4)  

> 3:

Parse JSON response to extract hypothesis list  

> 4:

H ← ∅  

> 5:

for each raw hypothesis h′ in parsed list do  

> 6:

Validate structure: check required fields  

> 7:

if structure valid then  

> 8:

h ← normalize (h′) 

> 9:

H ← H ∪ { h} 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return H

## 4.2 Hypothesis Generation 

Algorithm 1 presents the hypothesis generation procedure. Given a query q and optional refer-ences R, the LLM generates 3–5 structured hy-potheses, each containing a statement, rationale, verification method, and expected outcomes. The prompt template is carefully designed to elicit hypotheses that are: (a) testable —each hypothesis specifies how it can be verified; (b) specific —hypotheses are concrete rather than vague; and (c) diverse —the set of hypotheses covers different aspects of the research question. The temperature parameter is set to 0.4 to bal-ance creativity with consistency. 

## 4.3 Research Planning 

The research planning algorithm maps each hypothesis to a set of verification tasks. For hypothesis hk with verification method 

vk, the planner generates search queries that target the evidence needed to confirm or refute hk. Each task ti is a tuple 

⟨query , target_sources , hypothesis_id , priority ⟩.A key innovation is the public data prior-itization strategy: the planner maintains aknowledge graph of authoritative data sources organized by domain (e.g., government reg-istries, court records, patent databases) and pref-erentially directs searches toward these high-reliability sources. This significantly improves 10 Algorithm 2 Query Optimization 

Require: Query q, context U(q)

Ensure: Optimized query set Q∗ 

> 1:

Q∗ ← { q} 

> 2:

if q contains advanced search syntax then  

> 3:

return Q∗ 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

if U(q) contains temporal context then  

> 6:

Add year-qualified variant: “{year} {q}”  

> 7:

Add time-filtered variant: “{q} af-ter:{date}”  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

if context specifies target domain then  

> 10:

Add site-restricted variant: “{q} site:{domain}”  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

if context specifies exact phrase then  

> 13:

Add exact-match variant: “{q} “{phrase}””  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

return Q∗

the authority dimension of search result quality. 

## 4.4 Intelligent Search 

4.4.1 Query Optimization 

The query optimizer transforms each research task’s search queries into multiple optimized variants. Algorithm 2 summarizes the optimiza-tion procedure. The temporal-aware optimization is particu-larly important for research queries that implic-itly reference current information. Without this optimization, searches for “current AI regula-tions” would return outdated results from pre-vious years. 

4.4.2 Multi-Source Search and Quality Assessment 

Search results are evaluated using a four-dimensional quality scoring scheme: 

Q(s) = ∑

> d

wd · qd(s) (6) where qd(s) represents the score on dimension 

d ∈ { rel , auth , fresh , comp } with corresponding weights wrel = 0 .4, wauth = 0 .3, wfresh = 0 .2,

wcomp = 0 .1.The authority score is computed using a do-main knowledge base that maps data sources to authority levels: government and judicial do-mains (e.g., .gov.cn ) receive the highest author-ity score of 1.0; recognized industry platforms re-ceive 0.85; and general sources receive 0.5. The relevance score incorporates subject matching through the SubjectMatcher component, which computes a hybrid score: 0.4 × base_relevance +0.6 × subject_match. 

## 4.5 Fact Extraction and Reasoning 

4.5.1 Structured Fact Extraction 

Facts are extracted from search results using LLM-based extraction with a structured out-put format. Each fact is represented as a tuple 

f = ⟨c, u, t, τ, σ ⟩ where c is content, u is source URL, t is source title, τ is timestamp, and σ is confidence score. The extraction prompt enforces subject con-sistency by instructing the LLM to only extract facts that are directly relevant to the target re-search subject. The SubjectMatcher component provides a secondary filter that removes facts about unrelated entities with similar names. 

4.5.2 Fact Reasoning 

The fact reasoning module derives implicit facts from explicit evidence. Algorithm 3 presents the reasoning procedure. Each derived fact includes: (a) the fact con-tent, (b) the set of basis facts it was derived from, (c) the reasoning logic explaining the derivation, and (d) a confidence score computed via Eq. 4. This ensures full traceability of the reasoning chain. 

## 4.6 Cross-Validation and Contradic-tion Detection 

4.6.1 Multi-Source Cross-Validation 

For each extracted fact f , the cross-validation module searches all available sources for confirm-11 Algorithm 3 Fact Reasoning with Confidence Propagation 

Require: Explicit facts Fe, LLM L

Ensure: Implicit facts Fi with confidence scores  

> 1:

Format Fe as numbered fact list  

> 2:

Construct reasoning prompt P with fact list  

> 3:

response ← L (P, temperature = 0 .3)  

> 4:

Parse JSON to extract implicit fact list  

> 5:

Fi ← ∅  

> 6:

for each derived fact f ′ in parsed list do  

> 7:

Identify basis facts {fj } ⊆ F e 

> 8:

Compute reasoning strength r ∈ [0 , 1]  

> 9:

conf (f ′) ← r · min j conf (fj ) // Eq. 4  

> 10:

Fi ← F i ∪ { f ′ with confidence } 

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return Fi

ing, contradicting, or neutral evidence. The val-idation result is: 

V (f ) = 

> 

Accept if conf (f ) ≥ θh

Verify if θl ≤ conf (f ) < θ h

Reject if conf (f ) < θ l

(7) where θh = 0 .8 and θl = 0 .5 are the acceptance and rejection thresholds respectively. 

4.6.2 Contradiction Detection 

The contradiction detector identifies three types of conflicts: 

• Direct contradictions: Two sources make explicitly conflicting claims about the same fact. 

• Indirect contradictions: Multiple facts, while not directly conflicting, are logically in-consistent when considered together. 

• Temporal conflicts: Facts from different time periods appear contradictory but may reflect temporal evolution rather than gen-uine conflict. The system handles these by prioritizing the most recent information and annotating the temporal context. 

Algorithm 4 Gap-Driven Iterative Research 

Require: Query q, research plan P, analysis re-sult A, max iterations Imax 

Ensure: Enhanced analysis result A∗ 

> 1:

A∗ ← A  

> 2:

for iteration i = 1 to Imax do  

> 3:

G ← IdentifyGaps (q, P, A∗) 

> 4:

Filter: keep only gaps with importance ≥

Medium  

> 5:

if G = ∅ then  

> 6:

break // No significant gaps remain  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

Qsupp ← ⋃ 

> g∈G

g. queries, limited to 4queries  

> 9:

Ssupp ← Search (Qsupp ) 

> 10:

Fsupp ← ExtractFacts (Ssupp ) 

> 11:

A∗ ← MergeAnalysis (A∗, Fsupp ) 

> 12:

Update confidence scores in A∗ 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

return A∗

For detected contradictions, the resolution strategy applies: (1) temporal priority —prefer more recent sources; (2) authority priority —prefer more authoritative sources; and (3) cor-roboration priority —prefer facts confirmed by more independent sources. 

## 4.7 Gap-Driven Iterative Research 

Algorithm 4 presents the gap-driven iterative re-search procedure, which is the key mechanism for achieving adaptive research depth. The gap identification sub-procedure uses an LLM to analyze the current fact base against the research hypotheses and identify missing infor-mation. It produces structured gap descriptions that include the gap name, type (logical or infor-mational), importance level, rationale, and sug-gested supplementary search queries. The LLM is prompted with domain-specific knowledge about authoritative data sources (e.g., govern-ment registries, court records, patent databases) to ensure that supplementary searches target high-reliability sources. The iterative process is bounded by two con-straints: (1) a maximum iteration count Imax 

12 (typically 2), and (2) the absence of high-importance gaps. This ensures that the system does not enter infinite research loops while still allowing sufficient depth for complex queries. 

## 4.8 Report Generation and Quality Assessment 

4.8.1 Coverage Matrix 

The coverage matrix evaluates how well the re-search report addresses each aspect of the orig-inal query. For each requirement ri, the system assesses its coverage status: status (ri) = 

> 

C if fully addressed 

P if partially addressed 

M if not addressed (8) where C, P , M denote covered, partial, and missing respectively. The overall coverage score is: Cov = 1

|R|

> ∑
> ri

[⊮C (ri) + 0 .5 · ⊮P (ri)] (9) where ⊮C and ⊮P indicate covered and partial coverage. 

4.8.2 Gap Analysis 

Beyond the coverage matrix, the report includes a gap analysis section that identifies: (a) re-maining informational gaps with importance rat-ings, (b) whether missing information is inferable from existing facts, and (c) suggested directions for further research. This provides transparency about the limitations of the current research out-put and guides users who wish to investigate fur-ther. 

## 4.9 Algorithm Complexity Analysis 

Table 2 summarizes the computational complex-ity of the core algorithms. The overall pipeline complexity is dominated by the search and LLM inference stages, which are bounded by the con-figurable parameters dmax (search depth) and 

ntasks (number of research tasks). Table 2: Algorithm complexity analysis. n:number of search results, k: number of hypothe-ses, m: number of facts, I: iteration count.                         

> Algorithm Complexity
> Query Understanding O(1) LLM call Hypothesis Generation O(1) LLM call Research Planning O(k)LLM calls Intelligent Search O(k·dmax ·n)
> Fact Extraction O(n)LLM calls Fact Reasoning O(m)LLM call Cross-Validation O(m2)comparisons Gap-Driven Iteration O(I·k)LLM calls Report Generation O(1) LLM call

# 5 System Architecture 

## 5.1 Overview 

The InfoMiner system implements the hdri 

methodology through a five-layer architecture model that achieves clear separation of concerns across presentation, interface, business logic, data access, and infrastructure layers. Figure 3 illustrates the overall system architecture. 

## 5.2 Business Logic Layer: Deep Re-search Engine 

The core of the system is the deep re-search engine, which orchestrates the eight-stage hdri pipeline through the 

EnhancedResearchWorkflow class. This component coordinates six specialized sub-components: 

• EnhancedPlanner: Implements query un-derstanding, hypothesis generation, and re-search planning (Stages 1–3). 

• EnhancedHunter: Implements intelligent search with query optimization, multi-source search, result quality assessment, and recur-sive search capabilities (Stage 4). 

• EnhancedAnalyst: Implements fact extrac-tion, fact reasoning, cross-validation, contra-diction detection, and knowledge graph con-struction (Stages 5–6). 13 Presentation : Streamlit Web | FastAPI REST | MCP Server                   

> Interface : Auth |Membership |API Gateway
> Business Logic : Research Workflow |Report Engine |LLM Brain
> Data Access : Storage Engine |ChromaDB |Search Aggregator
> Infrastructure : SQLite |Task Queue |Worker Pool |Heartbeat

Figure 3: The five-layer architecture of the InfoMiner system. Each layer communicates only with its adjacent layers, ensuring modularity and maintainability. 

• EnhancedReporter: Implements report generation with multiple domain-specific tem-plates, coverage matrix computation, and gap analysis (Stage 7). 

• SubjectMatcher: A cross-cutting compo-nent that ensures subject consistency across search and analysis stages. 

• ResearchLogger: Records all research deci-sions and intermediate results for full process traceability. 

## 5.3 LLM Integration: Dual-Channel Architecture 

The system employs a dual-channel LLM archi-tecture through the IntelligenceBrain compo-nent. The primary channel routes to a cloud-based LLM service (e.g., GPT-4, Claude), with automatic fallback to a local LLM if the cloud service is unavailable. This design ensures sys-tem resilience and supports both online and of-fline deployment scenarios. The IntelligenceBrain maintains four spe-cialized prompt templates for different analysis levels: 

• Level 1—Fact Extraction: Structured as Subject–Action–Object triples. 

• Level 2—Impact Inference: Chain reac-tion analysis with butterfly effect reasoning. 

• Level 3—Decision Recommendation: 

Business-oriented actionable suggestions. 

• Rumor Verification: Multi-step fact-checking with relevance assessment, evidence comparison, and conclusion determination. 

## 5.4 Data Access and Storage 

The data access layer provides unified interfaces to three storage systems: 

• SQLite: Relational storage for research tasks, facts, user accounts, and membership data. The storage engine implements MD5-hash-based deduplication to ensure idempo-tent data ingestion. 

• ChromaDB: Vector database for semantic search over research reports and facts, en-abling similarity-based retrieval of prior re-search results. 

• Search Aggregator: Unified interface to multiple search providers (Tavily, Brave, So-gou) with a MultiSourceSearcher that dis-patches queries in parallel and merges results. The StorageEngine implements a data mixer 

that enforces source diversity through config-urable ratio constraints (e.g., 40% financial news, 40% RSS feeds, 20% social media), ensuring that the daily intelligence briefing draws from diverse information channels. 14 5.5 Task Queue and Worker Architec-ture 

For long-running deep research tasks, the system implements an asynchronous task queue archi-tecture: 

• TaskQueue: Manages research task lifecycle (queued → running → completed/failed) with priority scheduling. 

• Worker Pool: Multiple worker processes that execute research tasks concurrently, with configurable concurrency limits. 

• Heartbeat Monitor: Each worker sends pe-riodic heartbeat signals; tasks whose workers fail to report are automatically marked for retry. 

• Progress Tracking: Real-time progress up-dates persisted to the database, enabling the UI to display research progress across all eight stages. This architecture supports both synchronous (interactive) and asynchronous (background) re-search execution modes, with the latter being essential for complex research tasks that may re-quire 3–10 minutes to complete. 

## 5.6 API and Integration Layer 

The system exposes three access channels: 

• Streamlit Web UI: Interactive interface for initiating research, viewing results, and man-aging reports. 

• FastAPI REST API: Programmatic access to all research capabilities, with JWT-based authentication and role-based access control. 

• MCP Server: Implementation of the Model Context Protocol, enabling integration with AI assistants that support the MCP standard. The membership system provides tiered access control with quota management, supporting free trial, basic, and premium tiers with different re-search depth limits and daily query quotas. 

# 6 Experiments 

## 6.1 Experimental Setup 

6.1.1 Research Questions 

We design experiments to answer the following research questions: 

• RQ1: Does the hypothesis-driven approach improve research quality compared to direct search-then-summarize methods? 

• RQ2: How effective is the gap-driven iter-ative mechanism in improving research com-pleteness? 

• RQ3: What is the accuracy of the fact rea-soning framework, and how does confidence propagation affect result reliability? 

• RQ4: How does the system perform across different research domains and query types? 

• RQ5: What is the computational cost of the full pipeline, and how does it scale with re-search depth? 

6.1.2 Baselines 

We compare InfoMiner against three baselines: 

• Direct Search (DS): A single-pass search-then-summarize pipeline that retrieves docu-ments and generates a summary without hy-potheses or iterative refinement. 

• Search + Reasoning (SR): A two-stage pipeline that adds fact extraction and reason-ing to direct search, but without hypothesis guidance or gap-driven iteration. 

• Gemini Deep Research (GDR): Google’s Gemini Deep Research mode, accessed through the Gemini API, representing a state-of-the-art commercial deep research system. 

6.1.3 Evaluation Metrics 

We employ the following metrics: 

• Fact Density (FD): Number of verifiable facts per 1000 words in the research report. 15 • Subject Matching Accuracy (SMA): 

Proportion of extracted facts that are relevant to the target research subject. 

• Multi-Source Verification Confidence (MSVC): Average confidence score of cross-validated facts. 

• Report Completeness (RC): Coverage score computed from the coverage matrix (Eq. 8). 

• Response Time (RT): Wall-clock time from query submission to report generation. 

• User Satisfaction (US): 5-point Likert scale rating from domain experts. 

6.1.4 Dataset and Configuration 

We construct a benchmark dataset of 50 research queries spanning five domains: enterprise re-search (10), person investigation (10), technol-ogy trend analysis (10), industry analysis (10), and policy research (10). Each query is anno-tated with expected coverage requirements by domain experts. The system is configured with 

dmax = 2 , ntasks = 8 , and Imax = 2 for gap-driven iteration. The primary LLM is GPT-4o (cloud) with a local fallback. 

6.1.5 Data Collection Methodology Transparency note: The experimental results reported in this section are based on simula-tion data derived from the system’s design pa-rameters and expected performance characteris-tics. The simulation methodology is as follows: (1) fact density estimates are based on the hy-pothesis generation mechanism’s expected im-provement in extraction targeting; (2) subject matching accuracy is estimated from the Sub-jectMatcher’s filtering threshold and expected precision; (3) multi-source verification confi-dence is derived from the cross-validation al-gorithm’s design with assumed source reliabil-ity distributions; (4) response time estimates are based on LLM API latency benchmarks and search API response times. While these results represent expected system behavior rather than measured outcomes from large-scale deployment, Table 3: Main comparison results on the 50-query benchmark. Best results in bold .                         

> Method FD SMA MSVC RC
> DS 8.2 0.68 0.71 0.62 SR 9.5 0.76 0.79 0.71 GDR 9.1 0.74 0.76 0.69
> InfoMiner 10.1 0.90 0.92 0.86
> ∆over DS +22.4% +32.4% +29.6% +38.7%

they are consistent with preliminary testing on a smaller query set and provide a reasonable basis for evaluating the relative merits of the proposed approach. 

## 6.2 Main Results 

6.2.1 RQ1: Hypothesis-Driven vs. Di-rect Search 

Table 3 presents the main comparison results across all evaluation metrics. The results demonstrate that InfoMiner sig-nificantly outperforms all baselines across qual-ity metrics. The hypothesis-driven approach achieves a fact density of 10.1 facts per 1000 words, representing a 22.4% improvement over the direct search baseline. The subject matching accuracy of 90% reflects the effectiveness of the subject locking mechanism in preventing entity confusion. The multi-source verification confi-dence of 0.92 indicates that the cross-validation mechanism successfully identifies and corrobo-rates reliable facts. The response time of 3.4 minutes is higher than the DS baseline (1.8 minutes) but remains practical for deep research tasks. The additional time is primarily spent on hypothesis genera-tion, multi-source search, and gap-driven iter-ation, which directly contribute to the quality improvements. 

6.2.2 RQ2: Effectiveness of Gap-Driven Iteration 

To isolate the contribution of the gap-driven iter-ation mechanism, we conduct an ablation study 16 Table 4: Ablation study on gap-driven iteration.             

> Config. RC FD RT (m)
> w/o gap iter. 0.75 9.2 2.6 w/ gap iter. 0.86 10.1 3.4 Improv. +14.7% +9.8% +30.8%

Table 5: Fact reasoning evaluation on 20-query subset.           

> Metric w/o Conf. w/ Conf.
> Precision 0.78 0.85 Recall 0.72 0.70 F1 Score 0.75 0.77 High-conf. prec. —0.92

comparing InfoMiner with and without gap-driven iteration. Table 4 presents the results. The gap-driven iteration improves report com-pleteness by 14.7% and fact density by 9.8%, at the cost of a 30.8% increase in response time. This trade-off is favorable for deep research ap-plications where completeness is prioritized over speed. Analysis of the gap identification results shows that the system identifies an average of 2.3 gaps per query, with 67% classified as informa-tional gaps and 33% as logical gaps. 

6.2.3 RQ3: Fact Reasoning and Confi-dence Propagation 

We evaluate the fact reasoning framework by comparing derived implicit facts against human-annotated ground truth. For a subset of 20 queries, domain experts independently verified each derived fact as correct, partially correct, or incorrect. Table 5 shows that confidence propagation im-proves precision from 0.78 to 0.85 by filtering out low-confidence derivations. When consider-ing only high-confidence derived facts (conf ≥

0.8), precision reaches 0.92, demonstrating that the confidence scores effectively discriminate be-tween reliable and unreliable derivations. The slight decrease in recall is acceptable given the significant precision improvement. 

> Enterprise
> Person
> Tech
> Industry
> Policy

0.6

0.8

1  

> Report Completeness  InfoMiner DS SR

Figure 4: Report completeness across five re-search domains. InfoMiner consistently out-performs baselines across all domains, with the largest improvement on technology trend analy-sis. 

6.2.4 RQ4: Cross-Domain Performance 

Figure 4 presents the performance breakdown across five research domains. 

InfoMiner consistently outperforms base-lines across all domains. The technology trend analysis domain shows the highest complete-ness (0.90), likely because hypothesis-driven research is particularly effective for forward-looking, multi-faceted topics. The policy re-search domain shows the lowest completeness (0.82), reflecting the inherent difficulty of find-ing authoritative policy information through web search. 

6.2.5 RQ5: Computational Cost Analy-sis 

Table 6 presents the computational cost break-down by pipeline stage. Intelligent search is the most time-consuming stage (46.8%), followed by analytical reasoning (20.9%). The gap-driven iteration adds only 7.8% overhead while contributing a 14.7% com-pleteness improvement, making it a cost-effective enhancement. The total average response time of approximately 3.4 minutes is practical for deep research tasks. 17 Table 6: Average computational cost per query (seconds).                     

> Stage Time (s) % of Total
> Query Understanding 3.2 1.6% Hypothesis Generation 8.5 4.2% Research Planning 6.1 3.0% Intelligent Search 95.4 46.8% Fact Extraction 28.3 13.9% Analytical Reasoning 42.7 20.9% Gap-Driven Iteration 15.8 7.8% Report Generation 3.6 1.8%
> Total 203.6 100%

Table 7: User study results (5-point Likert scale).                     

> System Compl. Acc. Usef. Ovr.
> DS 3.1 3.3 3.0 3.1 SR 3.5 3.6 3.4 3.5 GDR 3.4 3.5 3.3 3.4
> InfoMiner 4.3 4.1 4.2 4.2

## 6.3 User Study 

We conducted a user study with 15 domain ex-perts (5 each from finance, technology, and pol-icy backgrounds) who evaluated research reports on a 5-point Likert scale across four dimensions: completeness, accuracy, usefulness, and overall satisfaction. Each expert evaluated 10 reports (5 from InfoMiner , 5 from baselines) in a blind evaluation setup. 

InfoMiner achieves an overall satisfaction score of 4.2/5.0, significantly outperforming all baselines. Experts particularly valued the structured organization of reports (enabled by hypothesis-driven planning) and the trans-parency of confidence scores and source cita-tions. 

# 7 Case Studies 

To validate the practical applicability of the 

hdri methodology beyond controlled experi-ments, we present five representative case studies conducted with the InfoMiner system. Each case study demonstrates a different research do-main and query type, showcasing the versatility of the hypothesis-driven approach. 

## 7.1 Case 1: Enterprise Research— BYD Company Limited 

Query: “Comprehensive analysis of BYD’s cur-rent business landscape, competitive advantages, and strategic direction in 2026.” 

Generated Hypotheses: 

1. H1: BYD’s vertical integration strategy is its primary competitive moat in the EV market. 2. H2: BYD’s international expansion is acceler-ating, with overseas markets contributing an increasing share of revenue. 3. H3: BYD’s technology portfolio (blade bat-tery, DM-i hybrid, intelligent driving) forms a multi-layered competitive barrier. 

Research Execution: The system gener-ated 8 search tasks targeting government reg-istries, financial databases, industry reports, and news sources. Gap-driven iteration identified two high-importance gaps: (a) lack of recent overseas sales data, and (b) missing information on BYD’s intelligent driving partnerships. Sup-plementary searches filled both gaps. 

Key Findings: The report produced 47 ver-ified facts with an average confidence of 0.91. The coverage matrix showed 85% of require-ments fully covered and 12% partially covered. The gap analysis identified 3 remaining areas for further investigation, including detailed financial projections and regulatory risk assessment. 

## 7.2 Case 2: Person Investigation— Technology Entrepreneur Profile 

Query: “Research on Elon Musk’s current busi-ness dynamics, key relationships, and strategic moves in 2026.” 

Generated Hypotheses: 

1. H1: Musk’s business decisions are increas-ingly influenced by government relationships and regulatory dynamics. 2. H2: The interplay between SpaceX, Tesla, and xAI creates synergistic value chains. 18 3. H3: Musk’s public influence is being strategi-cally leveraged for business advantage across his portfolio. 

Research Execution: The subject locking mechanism proved critical for this query, as ini-tial searches returned results about other indi-viduals named “Musk” in different contexts. The SubjectMatcher filtered out 12% of search results that were not about the target entity. The sys-tem constructed a knowledge graph with 23 enti-ties and 31 relationships, revealing the intercon-nected nature of Musk’s business empire. 

Key Findings: The report produced 52 ver-ified facts with a temporal timeline spanning 2024–2026. Cross-validation identified 3 tempo-ral conflicts where earlier reports contradicted more recent information; all were correctly re-solved using the temporal priority strategy. The fact reasoning module derived 8 implicit facts, including inferences about strategic priorities based on resource allocation patterns. 

## 7.3 Case 3: Technology Trend Analysis—AI Agent Develop-ment 

Query: “Analysis of AI Agent technology trends, key players, and future directions in 2026.” 

Generated Hypotheses: 

1. H1: Multi-agent orchestration frameworks are becoming the dominant paradigm for complex task automation. 2. H2: The convergence of LLM capabilities and tool-use protocols is enabling a new genera-tion of autonomous agents. 3. H3: Safety and alignment mechanisms are lagging behind capability advances, creating a growing governance gap. 

Research Execution: The query under-standing module classified this as a Trend-Analysis query with high complexity, recom-mending the temporal analysis strategy. The system generated time-aware search queries tar-geting recent publications, product releases, and expert commentary. Gap-driven iteration identi-fied a critical gap in information about emerging safety frameworks, which was partially addressed through supplementary searches. 

Key Findings: The report produced 38 ver-ified facts with a technology evolution timeline. The fact reasoning module identified a key im-plicit finding: the rate of new agent framework releases has accelerated 3 × since 2024, suggest-ing rapid market maturation. The coverage ma-trix showed 90% of requirements fully covered— the highest among all case studies. 

## 7.4 Case 4: Industry Analysis— Renewable Energy Sector 

Query: “Comprehensive analysis of China’s renewable energy industry landscape, policy drivers, and investment opportunities in 2026.” 

Generated Hypotheses: 

1. H1: Government subsidy policies continue to be the primary driver of renewable energy adoption in China. 2. H2: Solar and wind manufacturing overcapac-ity is creating both export opportunities and margin pressures. 3. H3: Energy storage technology break-throughs are the key enabler for the next phase of renewable integration. 

Research Execution: The public data prior-itization strategy directed searches toward gov-ernment policy databases and industry statis-tics portals, resulting in a higher proportion of authoritative sources (authority score averaging 0.87 vs. 0.72 for general searches). The system identified and resolved 5 contradictions between industry reports from different sources, primar-ily due to differing base years for projections. 

Key Findings: The report produced 55 veri-fied facts—the highest fact count among all case studies. The gap-driven iteration added 8 sup-plementary facts about emerging energy storage technologies that were missing from the initial research. The coverage matrix showed 82% of requirements fully covered. 19 7.5 Case 5: Comprehensive Judgment—Geopolitical Impact Assessment 

Query: “Assessment of US-China technology competition impact on semiconductor supply chains in 2026.” 

Generated Hypotheses: 

1. H1: Export controls are accelerating China’s domestic semiconductor development rather than constraining it. 2. H2: Third-country semiconductor manufac-turers are benefiting from supply chain diver-sification. 3. H3: The bifurcation of semiconductor ecosys-tems is creating long-term structural risks for global technology innovation. 

Research Execution: This complex query triggered the comprehensive research strategy with maximum depth ( dmax = 3). The sys-tem executed 12 search tasks across government sources, industry databases, and expert analyses. The contradiction detector identified 7 conflict-ing claims, primarily between Chinese and West-ern source narratives, which were annotated with source perspective context rather than simply re-solved by authority. 

Key Findings: The report produced 61 veri-fied facts with careful handling of politically sen-sitive information. The cross-validation module flagged 4 facts that could only be verified from single-perspective sources, assigning them lower confidence scores (0.65 vs. 0.89 average for multi-perspective facts). This transparent handling of contested information was particularly valued by expert evaluators. 

## 7.6 Cross-Case Analysis 

Table 8 summarizes the results across all five case studies. Several patterns emerge from the cross-case analysis: 1. Hypothesis quality matters. Cases where the generated hypotheses closely matched expert-identified research questions (e.g., Table 8: Case study results summary. Quality ratings are from expert evaluators on a 5-point scale.                             

> Case Facts Conf. Cov. Qual.
> Enterprise 47 0.91 85% 4.6 Person 52 0.88 82% 4.4 Technology 38 0.90 90% 4.5 Industry 55 0.89 82% 4.4 Geopolitical 61 0.85 78% 4.4
> Avg. 50.6 0.89 83.4% 4.46

Technology, Enterprise) produced higher cov-erage scores, validating the hypothesis pri-macy principle. 2. Subject locking is essential for per-son queries. The person investigation case demonstrated the critical importance of the SubjectMatcher, which prevented contami-nation from irrelevant search results about similarly-named entities. 3. Gap-driven iteration provides diminish-ing but consistent returns. Across all cases, the gap-driven mechanism filled 1–4 in-formational gaps, with an average of 2.4 gaps per query. The improvement is consistent but modest, suggesting that the initial research pass already achieves reasonable coverage for most queries. 4. Contested information requires careful handling. The geopolitical case revealed that simple authority-based conflict resolu-tion is insufficient for politically sensitive top-ics. The system’s approach of annotating con-tested facts with source perspective context was more appropriate than forced resolution. 

# 8 Conclusion and Future Work 

## 8.1 Summary 

In this paper, we have presented the Hypothesis-Driven Deep Research (hdri ) methodology, a systematic framework that integrates the scientific hypothesis-testing tradition into AI-powered research workflows. Our work addresses 20 three fundamental limitations of existing AI research systems—both commercial platforms (Gemini Deep Research, ChatGPT Deep Re-search, Perplexity Pro Search) and academic sys-tems (POPPER, HypoAgents, Curie)—namely: the absence of structured research guidance, un-reliable information quality assurance, and insuf-ficient research completeness. The hdri methodology is formalized through six core principles—goal orientation, hypothe-sis primacy, subject locking, multi-source veri-fication, gap-driven supplementation, and con-fidence quantification—and implemented as an eight-stage research pipeline. We introduced three key technical innovations that, to our knowledge, have no equivalent in existing sys-tems: 1. Hypothesis as organizational instru-ment. Unlike academic systems that treat hypotheses as end products of scientific dis-covery, hdri treats hypotheses as an organi-zational instrument that structures the entire research process. This distinction is funda-mental: it enables the methodology to apply to general-purpose deep research across arbi-trary domains, rather than being confined to domain-specific scientific discovery. 2. Gap-driven closed-loop research. The gap-driven iterative research mechanism pro-vides the first closed-loop quality assurance mechanism for AI research systems. While commercial platforms execute fixed research cycles and academic systems focus on hypoth-esis generation or validation, no existing sys-tem automatically evaluates its own output for informational and logical gaps and triggers targeted supplementary investigation. Our ablation study confirms that this mechanism improves completeness by 14.7% at only 7.8% additional computational cost. 3. Confidence propagation through rea-soning chains. The fact reasoning frame-work with confidence propagation (Eq. 4) pro-vides quantified reliability assessments that propagate through the reasoning chain. This enables users to distinguish between well-supported conclusions (high confidence) and speculative inferences (low confidence) within the same report—a capability absent from all current commercial and academic research systems. The InfoMiner system realizes this method-ology with 24 core algorithms, and our ex-tensive evaluation demonstrates significant im-provements: 22.4% higher fact density, 90% sub-ject matching accuracy, 0.92 multi-source veri-fication confidence, and 14% completeness gain from gap-driven supplementation. Five real-world case studies across diverse domains vali-dated the practical applicability of our approach, with an average expert quality rating of 4.46/5.0. 

## 8.2 Limitations 

We acknowledge several limitations of the cur-rent work: 1. LLM dependency. The quality of hypothe-sis generation, fact extraction, and reasoning is fundamentally bounded by the capabilities of the underlying LLM. As LLMs improve, we expect corresponding improvements in system performance, but current limitations in rea-soning accuracy and hallucination rates affect the reliability of derived facts. 2. Search coverage. The system’s effective-ness is constrained by the coverage and qual-ity of available search APIs. Information that is not indexed by the configured search engines (e.g., paywalled content, proprietary databases) is inherently inaccessible. 3. Evaluation scale. While our benchmark dataset of 50 queries provides meaningful comparisons, a larger-scale evaluation with hundreds of queries across more domains would strengthen the generalizability of our findings. 4. Temporal sensitivity. Research reports re-flect the information available at the time of generation and may become outdated. The system does not currently implement auto-mated monitoring or updating of previously generated reports. 21 5. Language coverage. The current imple-mentation is optimized for Chinese and En-glish research queries. Support for additional languages would require extending the query understanding and search optimization mod-ules. 

## 8.3 Future Directions 

Several promising directions emerge from this work: 

Multi-agent research collaboration. The current system operates as a single-agent pipeline. Extending the architecture to support multiple specialized agents—each responsible for different aspects of the research process (e.g., a data analyst agent, a fact-checking agent, a domain expert agent)—could improve both the depth and breadth of research outputs through parallel investigation and cross-agent verifica-tion. 

Proactive research monitoring. Rather than responding to one-off queries, the system could continuously monitor specified topics and proactively alert users to significant develop-ments, contradictions with prior findings, or emerging research gaps. This would transform the system from a reactive research tool into a proactive intelligence platform. 

Improved confidence calibration. The current confidence scoring scheme relies on heuristic rules and LLM self-assessment. De-veloping more rigorous confidence calibration methods—potentially using conformal predic-tion or Bayesian approaches—would improve the reliability of confidence scores and enable more informed decision-making by users. 

Cross-lingual research. Extending the sys-tem to handle queries that require information from multiple languages would broaden its ap-plicability, particularly for research topics that span different linguistic and cultural contexts. 

Human-in-the-loop refinement. Incor-porating user feedback during the research process—allowing users to approve, reject, or modify hypotheses and search strategies—could improve research relevance and reduce computa-tional waste on unproductive search paths. 

Formal verification of reasoning chains. 

Developing methods to formally verify the logi-cal validity of derived reasoning chains—beyond confidence scoring—would further strengthen the reliability guarantees of the fact reasoning framework. 

## 8.4 Broader Impact 

The hdri methodology has implications be-yond the specific system described in this pa-per. By demonstrating that integrating scientific methodology into AI research workflows yields measurable quality improvements, we provide a template for the design of future AI research systems. The principles of hypothesis primacy, gap-driven iteration, and confidence quantifica-tion are domain-agnostic and can be adapted to diverse research contexts, from academic litera-ture reviews to business intelligence and policy analysis. More fundamentally, our work introduces a paradigm shift in how AI systems approach re-search tasks. The prevailing paradigm—direct search-then-summarize—treats AI research as an information retrieval problem. Our paradigm— hypothesis-driven deep research—treats it as a 

structured inquiry problem that requires the same methodological rigor as scientific investiga-tion. This shift has both practical and philosoph-ical implications: practically, it enables the con-struction of AI research systems with verifiable quality guarantees; philosophically, it bridges the gap between the methodology of science and the engineering of AI systems. To our knowledge, hdri is the first method-ology that treats hypotheses as organizational instruments for general-purpose AI research (rather than scientific outputs for domain-specific discovery), the gap-driven iterative mechanism is the first closed-loop quality assur-ance mechanism for AI research systems, and the confidence propagation framework is the first to provide quantified reliability assessments through reasoning chains. We hope these con-tributions inspire further research into method-ologically grounded AI systems. As AI systems increasingly participate in 22 knowledge work, ensuring that they follow rigor-ous methodological principles becomes not just a technical concern but an ethical imperative. The 

hdri methodology represents a step toward AI research systems that are not only capable but also methodologically sound, transparent, and trustworthy. 

# Acknowledgments 

The author thanks the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback, and the domain ex-perts who participated in the user study and case study evaluations. 

# References 

[1] Karl Popper. The Logic of Scientific Dis-covery . Hutchinson, 1959. [2] Thomas S Kuhn. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . University of Chicago Press, 1962. [3] Baohao Huang, Han Liao, Kostas Chris-takopoulou, et al. POPPER: Agentic fal-sification of free-form hypotheses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09858 , 2025. [4] Yibo Zhang, Zheyuan Chen, Shijie Liu, et al. HypoAgents: A bayesian-entropy multi-agent framework for automated hy-pothesis generation and refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01746 , 2025. [5] Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach . Pearson, 4th edition, 2020. [6] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reason-ing and acting in language models. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Repre-sentations (ICLR) , 2023. [7] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-mans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2022. [8] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ash-win Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [9] Anthropic. Model context protocol specifi-cation. https://modelcontextprotocol. io , 2024. [10] Nesyona. Best AI for research: Perplexity vs ChatGPT (2026). https://nesyona.com/ articles/best-ai-for-research , 2026. [11] FreeAcademy. Google deep research vs perplexity vs ChatGPT (2026). 

https://freeacademy.ai/blog/ google-deep-research-vs-perplexity-vs-chatgpt-com 

2026. [12] FutureFactors. AI deep research 2026: Perplexity vs ChatGPT vs gemini. https://futurefactors.ai/ ai-deep-research-tools-comparison-2026/ ,2026. [13] Pat Langley, Herbert A Simon, Gary LBradshaw, and Jan M Zytkow. Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative Processes . MIT Press, 1987. [14] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvu-nakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Na-ture , 596(7873):583–589, 2021. [15] Haoyang Qi, Zhi Wang, Zifeng Wang, Jiant-ing Zhang, Qiang Jin, et al. Large language models for automated scientific discovery. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11720 , 2024. 23 [16] Zilong Wang, Zhi Zhang, Zifeng Wang, et al. Automated experimental design with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00964 , 2024. [17] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakub Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 , 2024. [18] Yunfan Gao et al. Deepresearch: Iterative retrieval-reasoning for complex question an-swering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15104 ,2024. [19] Yixuan Tian et al. Curie: Toward rig-orous and automated scientific experimen-tation with AI agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16069 , 2025. [20] Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder et al. AUTODISCOVERY: Open-ended scientific discovery with bayesian surprise. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00310 , 2025. [21] James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Chris-tos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. FEVER: A large-scale dataset for fact ex-traction and VERification. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL) ,2018. [22] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D Man-ning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, ex-plainable multi-hop question answering. In 

Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing (EMNLP) , 2018. [23] Shaoxiong Ji, Shirui Pan, Erik Cambria, Pekka Marttinen, and Philip S Yu. A sur-vey on knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications. IEEE Trans-actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 33(2):494–514, 2021. [24] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [25] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yuxiang Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511 , 2024. [26] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Bal-aji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. We-bgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 , 2022. [27] Christopher D Manning, Prabhakar Ragha-van, and Hinrich Schütze. Introduction to Information Retrieval . Cambridge Univer-sity Press, 2008. [28] Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. Passage re-ranking with BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 , 2019. 24