Title: The Scientific Contribution Graph: Automated Literature-based Technological Roadmapping at Scale

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15011v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:23:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
The Scientific Contribution Graph: Automated Literature-based Technological Roadmapping at Scale 

Peter A. Jansen 1,2 

> 1

University of Arizona, 2Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence 

pajansen@arizona.edu 

Abstract 

Scientific contributions rarely develop in iso-lation, but instead build upon prior discover-ies. We formulate the task of automated tech-nological roadmapping as extracting scientific contributions from scholarly articles and link-ing them to their prerequisites. We present the S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION GRAPH , a large-scale AI/NLP-domain resource contain-ing 2 million detailed scientific contributions extracted from 230k open-access papers and connected by 12.5 million prerequisite edges. We further introduce scientific prerequisite pre-diction, a scientific discovery task in which models predict which existing technologies can enable future discoveries, and show that con-temporary models are rapidly improving on this task, reaching 0.48 MAP when evaluated using temporally filtered backtesting. We anticipate technological roadmapping resources such as this will support scientific impact assessment and automated scientific discovery. 1

1 Introduction 

Sir Isaac Newton famously wrote, “If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants”. Scientific contributions are rarely developed in iso-lation, but build upon prior contributions, such as problem framings, experimental methods, and em-pirical findings. Understanding these prerequisite relationships is important for studying scientific progress, and for automated scientific discovery systems that must reason about which existing ca-pabilities can be used to develop new ones (e.g. Lu et al., 2024; Jansen et al., 2025b; Baek et al., 2025). Currently, the way scientific contributions build upon one another is typically represented using ei-ther paper-level citations or sentence-level triples extracted from papers. Citation analysis captures paper-level links (Wang et al., 2022; Zhang and 

> 1https://github.com/cognitiveailab/ scientific-contribution-graph

Wu, 2021; Ammar et al., 2018), but citations often provide background context (e.g. Li and Ouyang, 2024; Li et al., 2022), rather than indi-cating that one work was directly built upon an-other. Impactful-citation detection methods (e.g. Valenzuela et al., 2015; Nazir et al., 2020) partially control for this, but still operate at a coarse, whole-paper level: they cannot resolve, for example, that the data developed in Paper A depends specifi-cally upon the problem formulation proposed in Pa-per B. Conversely, scientific information extraction (IE) systems often extract sentence-level entities or triples, such as <SPEECH ENHANCEMENT , USES ,  

> SPECTRAL RESTORATION METHOD

> (a triple from CS-KG; Dessí et al., 2025). These triples are often decontextualized: it is unclear what specific technique is being discussed, or whether, and how, one contribution builds upon another. This leaves a representational utility gap between paper-level citation graphs and sentence-level triples. This work addresses this gap with the S CIEN - 

> TIFIC

CONTRIBUTION GRAPH , a large-scale re-source that represents scientific progress at an in-termediate granularity: finer than papers, but richer than triples. Nodes represent individual scientific contributions, while edges represent how one con-tribution builds upon precursor contributions. The graph contains 2M contributions from 230k open-access papers seeded from the ACL A NTHOLOGY ,and linked by 12.5M prerequisite edges, with an average of 9 extracted contributions per paper. Rather than representing nodes and edges as short entity mentions or triples, contribution nodes contain generated names and detailed summary descriptions, while edges explain how the source text describes one contribution as building upon another. Where nodes in existing graphs such as CS-KG average approximately 3 tokens, nodes and edges in the S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION 

GRAPH contain an average of 130 and 71 tokens, respectively. Building this graph requires model-1                                

> arXiv:2605.15011v1 [cs.CL] 14 May 2026 System Input Extraction Task Dependency Model Scale
> SCI ERC (Luan et al., 2018) 500 abstracts Span/relation labeling Typed triples 4.7k triples SCI REX (Jain et al., 2020) 438 papers Span/relation labeling N-ary tuples 2.2k tuples NLPC ONT . (D’Souza et al., 2021) 442 papers Span/relation labeling General SPO triples 30k triples SCI NLP-KG (Mondal et al., 2021) 30k papers Span/relation labeling Typed triples 8.1k triples SCI CLAIM (Magnusson et al., 2021) 901 sentences Span/relation labeling Sentence-level graphs 5.3k triples CS-KG V2 (Dessí et al., 2025) 14.5M papers Span/relation labeling Typed triples 67.5M triples
> SCI . C ONT . G RAPH
> (This work)
> 230k papers Seq2Seq contribution generation on full text Prereq. extraction + cross-paper alignment 2M nodes /12.5M edges

Table 1: A comparison of existing scientific knowledge graph efforts, including input source, extraction task framing, dependency model for edge construction, and scale. Prior systems primarily extract typed triples over short entity spans, where this work generates detailed scientific contribution nodes through seq2seq modeling, and edges through cross-paper contribution alignment. 

ing knowledge graph construction as open-ended sequence-to-sequence extraction over paper full text, rather than span labeling or triple extrac-tion over sentences or paragraphs (Dagdelen et al., 2024; Shamsabadi et al., 2024). This is computa-tionally nontrivial: the pipeline requires an average of 43 LLM calls per paper to extract contributions, identify prerequisites, and align them to graph con-tributions. To demonstrate utility for automated scientific discovery, this work introduces a scien-tific prerequisite prediction task, where a model must identify existing technologies required to de-velop a novel target technology. Using temporally filtered backtesting (e.g. Luo et al., 2018; Jansen et al., 2025a), we empirically demonstrate contem-porary language models have recently progressed from near-chance to moderate performance, sug-gesting near-term utility for scientific discovery. The contributions of this work are: 1. The S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION GRAPH , a re-source for technological roadmapping contain-ing 2M detailed scientific contributions from 230k open-access papers, linked by 12.5M pre-requisite edges describing how technologies build upon precursor technologies. 2. The formulation of scientific prerequisite predic-tion as a technological requirement prediction task for automated scientific discovery, paired with an empirical demonstration showing that contemporary language models have rapidly im-proved on this task, progressing from chance performance to 0.48 MAP in the last two years. 

2 Related Work 

Extracting Scientific Contributions: Prior work has extracted scientific contributions from liter-ature, most often as span-labeled named-entity recognition (NER) or structured information ex-traction. NER systems typically pre-define 3 to 10 entity classes, such as DATASETS , MODELS , METH -

> ODS

, TASKS , and METRICS (Das et al., 2025; Pra-manick et al., 2025; Otto et al., 2023; D’Souza et al., 2021; Luan et al., 2018), then identify con-tributions in abstracts or full text using classifica-tion or span-labeling. Recent work models scien-tific IE as sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) extrac-tion: Shamsabadi et al. (2024) extract structured schemas for virology papers, including the virus studied, location, time, and reproduction rate, while Dagdelen et al. (2024) extract material data using structured schemas. This seq2seq IE framing is used at scale here to build the knowledge graph. 

Scientific Knowledge Graphs: Existing scaled scientific knowledge graphs are primarily repre-sented as triples or N-ary relations, as shown in Ta-ble 1. The largest resource, CS-KG V2 (Dessí et al., 2025), is extracted using the SCICERO (Dessí et al., 2022) model, which maps entities to a stan-dard ontology. Mondal et al. (2021) extract two evaluation-centered relations, E VALUATED ON/B Y,from 30k NLP-domain papers; SciClaim (Magnus-son and Friedman, 2021) extracts sentence-level claim graphs; and D’Souza et al. (2021) extract open-ended triples from 442 papers, labeling them with 12 broad contribution types. In contrast, this work models extraction as open-ended sequence-to-sequence generation, extracting contribution names and detailed descriptions from full-text, rather than entity labels or triples from sentences using a pre-defined schema. These contributions are then linked to prerequisite contributions mentioned in the source text using an alignment procedure, yield-ing a large and detailed graph of 2M contributions and 12M edges extracted from 230k papers. 

Automated Scientific Discovery: Literature-based discovery is often framed as identifying “undis-covered public knowledge”, or plausible relations not explicitly stated in the literature, but inferred 2Contribution: Formulation of Explanation as Multi-Step Entailment Trees   

> Description: The paper frames open-domain textual QA explanation as constructing a directed entailment tree, where each node is a multi-premise entailment step that incrementally derives the hypothesis from known facts. This separates derivation correctness from user utility, enabling systematic evaluation of explanations independent of answer selection. By treating explanations as trees rather than isolated rationales, the work provides a conceptual framework for explainable QA.
> Description: Multi-premise textual entailment extends standard natural-language inference to infer a hypothesis from two or more premises, requiring models to combine information across sentences.

Prerequisite: Multi-Premise Entailment 

Prerequisite: Proof generation with language models  

> Description: Transformer-based language models can generate formal or natural-language proofs by sequentially applying inference rules, showing end-to-end structured reasoning feasibility.

Paper: Explaining Answers with Entailment Trees 

Contribution: EntailmentBank: A dataset of multi-step entailment trees  

> Description:
> authored entailment trees linking ARC multiple-choice science questions to supporting facts from WorldTree V2. Each tree makes explicit intermediate conclusions and premise provenance, averaging 7.6 nodes and 3.2 establishing a benchmark for models that generate structured explanations.
> Description: A collection of 7,787 grade-school multiple-choice science questions with correct answers, used as the source of QA pairs for which entailment trees are built.

Prerequisite: ARC science question set 

Prerequisite: WorldTree V2 corpus  

> Description: A structured knowledge base of elementary science facts and explanation graphs compiled for science QA, containing sentences and relational tables used as premises for the entailment trees.

Paper: Natural Language Inference from Multiple Premises 

Formulation of Multi-Premise Entailment 

Paper: Generative Language Modeling for Automated Theorem Proving 

Proof-Step Generation as a Language Modeling Task 

Paper: Learning to Prove Theorems by Learning to Generate Theorems 

MetaGen-RL-LM self-supervised reward generation for theorems 

Paper: Think you have solved QA? Try ARC, the Ai2 Reasoning Challenge 

ARC Multi-Hop Question Answering Dataset                                  

> L a i e t al . ( 2 013)
> Po lu etal.(20 20 )
> Wan g et a l.  (2  02 0)
> Clark et al. (20 18)
> Xi eet al. ( 2020 )
> Bos  tr o m et  al. (2 022 )
> Shi e tal. (20 25)
> Nat h a ni  e t al.  ( 20  23)
> Songetal.(2024 )
> Jiay angetal .(202 5)

Contribution Extraction Step Prerequisite Extraction Step Cross-Paper Edge Alignment Step Figure 1: Illustration of the graph constriction pipeline, including (1) extracting contributions from papers, (2) extracting prerequisites for each contribution, and (3) creating contribution dependency edges by aligning prerequisites to contributions from cited papers. Due to space limitations, only a small subset of contributions, prerequisites, edges, and content are shown. An average of 9 contributions are extracted from each paper, each containing an average of 6 prerequisite edges. 

by combining published relations (Swanson, 1986, 1988). Modern work often formulates discovery as link prediction over graphs of scientific concepts (Cesario et al., 2024; Pu et al., 2023; Crichton et al., 2020), or uses literature to generate research direc-tions through iterative refinement (Si et al., 2025), literature-generated idea facets (Radensky et al., 2024), or extrapolation from literature chains (Vasu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025). Most related, G IANTS 

(He-Yueya et al., 2026) tests whether LLMs can ideate future insights from two component tech-nologies, while C ODE SCIENTIST (Jansen et al., 2025b) ideates and tests literature-derived technolo-gies through code-based experimentation. This work instead focuses on technological roadmap-ping – representing how scientific contributions build upon prerequisite contributions – and evalu-ating the reverse prediction problem of predicting which existing scientific contributions are required to develop a novel target technology. 

3 Problem Formulation 

We formulate technological roadmapping as an automatic knowledge graph construction problem. Let D denote the input document corpus, instanti-ated here as scientific papers. The synthesis process maps D to a contribution graph ( G): D → G. The graph G consists of a set of nodes ci ∈ C, each representing an individual scientific contribution, and a set of edges ej ∈ E that link scientific con-tributions to their prerequisite technologies. Each contribution ci is represented as a < NAME ,

DESCRIPTION , METADATA > tuple, ⟨ni, d i, m i⟩,where ni is the name of the scientific contribu-tion, di is a natural-language description of the contribution, and mi is an optional set of associ-ated metadata, such as the title of the source pa-per and sections of the source paper that mention the contribution. Each edge ej is represented as a < PRECURSOR NODE , DEPENDENT NODE , AT -

TRIBUTES > tuple, ⟨cpre , c dep , a j ⟩, where cpre and 

cdep are the precursor and dependent contribution nodes, respectively, and aj is an optional set of edge attributes generated during extraction, such as a natural-language explanation of why cpre is described as a prerequisite technology for cdep .

3.1 Edge Alignment 

Papers typically describe how new scientific con-tributions build on existing contributions using a combination of references and prose. For example, the toy sentence “Our Contrastive-RLHF model modifies the preference-weighted RL training loss of Smith et al. (2025) with a contrastive objective...” 

3describes the dependent contribution ( “Contrastive-RLHF model” ), a candidate prerequisite technol-ogy ( “preference-weighted RL training loss” ), and its source ( “Smith et al. 2025” ). We model edge construction as a two-step process. First, for each dependent contribution cdep , we extract a list of candidate prerequisite technologies P (cdep ). Each candidate prerequisite pk ∈ P (cdep ) is represented as a < NAME , DESCRIPTION , EXPLANATION , REF -

> ERENCE

> tuple, ⟨pn k, pd k, pe k, pr k⟩, where pn k,

pd k, and pe k describe the prerequisite technology name, description, and a short natural-language ex-planation of why it is a prerequisite. The reference 

pr k typically identifies a source paper, including its title, year, and first author, but may also be an internal reference, when a later contribution in a paper depends upon an earlier contribution in the same paper, or an external artifact reference, such as a tool or software package referenced by a URL. Second, we align each candidate prerequisite pk

to a concrete precursor contribution node cpre . To generate an edge ej linking a dependent contribu-tion cdep to a precursor contribution, an aligner A

takes as input the dependent contribution cdep , the candidate prerequisite pk, and the paper introduc-ing the prerequisite, dpre , and produces an edge ej

as output: ej = A(cdep , p k, d pre ). The alignment algorithm used in this work is described below. 

4 Knowledge Graph Construction 

Figure 1 summarizes the construction pipeline. Starting from an initial corpus of papers, the pipeline iteratively expands the contribution graph by extracting contribution nodes, identifying pre-requisite technologies, and aligning those prereq-uisites to source contributions. After each batch, the next papers are selected from cited papers not yet in the graph, prioritized by citation frequency within the graph to minimize edge sparsity. 

4.1 Corpus of Open Access Papers 

The S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION GRAPH cur-rently contains contributions extracted from 230 K

open-access papers drawn from two permissively licensed sources. The seed corpus is a crawl of the ACL A NTHOLOGY 2, containing approximately 120 K papers licensed under Creative Commons CC-BY or CC-BY-SA licenses. Additional pa-pers are drawn from the Semantic Scholar Open Re-search Corpus (S2ORC) (Lo et al., 2020), which 

> 2https://aclanthology.org/

provides full text for open-access scientific papers. 

4.2 Extraction Pipeline 

The extraction pipeline proceeds in four stages: 

Step 1: Paper Selection: At each iteration, the crawler selects source papers dpre needed by the aligner to convert currently unresolved prerequi-site references into graph edges. It creates a his-togram over unresolved dpre references: source papers cited by existing candidate prerequisites, but not yet included in the graph. The most fre-quently cited open-access papers are selected for the next batch. For ACL A NTHOLOGY papers, or when full text is unavailable in S2ORC, paper text is extracted from the PDF using M ARKER 3.

Step 2: Extracting Contributions (Nodes): Con-tribution extraction is modeled as a sequence-to-sequence task (Sutskever et al., 2014), taking paper full text as input and returning JSON-formatted contribution nodes. For each paper, an instruction-formatted prompt extracts a set of contributions, specifying task desiderata, the desired level of ex-traction detail, and 17 high-level contribution cate-gories, including new problem formulations , theo-retical insights , conceptual frameworks , resources ,

analyses , tools , metrics , models , and algorithms ,with the full list shown in Table 4 in the A PPENDIX .Each extracted contribution includes its name, de-scription, contribution type(s), and the paper sec-tions where the information is found. On average, each paper includes 8.9 scientific contributions. 

Step 3: Extracting Candidate Prerequisites: For each contribution extracted in Step 2, an instruction-formatted prompt extracts candidate prerequisite contributions from the paper full text, using both reference context and prose descriptions of how the contribution builds on prior work. Each candidate prerequisite is represented as a < NAME , DESCRIP -

> TION

, EXPLANATION , REFERENCE > tuple, where the reference identifies the source needed for later edge alignment. References may be paper refer-ences to contributions from other papers, internal references to earlier contributions in the same paper, or artifact references , typically software or tools cited through URLs rather than paper citations. 

Step 4: Edge Alignment Across Contributions: 

After Step 3, each extracted contribution cdep is paired with candidate prerequisites pk, but these are not yet graph edges: each pk must first be 

> 3https://github.com/datalab-to/marker

4Alignment Category Interpretation Symbol Count Prop.                               

> Direct Matches Reference set and model identify same contribution R→M99 38% Additional Valid Contributions Valid model contribution not in reference set M→unmatched 64 25% High-Resolution Decomp. Model refines one reference contribution into multi-ple contributions
> R→(M1, . . . , M n)50 19% Coarser Decomposition Model combines multiple reference contributions into one contribution
> (R1, . . . , R n)→M24 9% Missed Contributions Reference-set contribution missed by model R→unmatched 22 9% Total 258 100%

Table 2: Alignment between reference-set (R) and model-based (M) scientific contribution extraction, broken down into 5 alignment categories. The model achieves 91% recall of reference-set contributions, while also identifying 25% additional valid contributions not captured in the manual reference set. In many cases (19%), the model produces higher-resolution decompositions, breaking coarser reference contributions into finer-grained contributions. 

aligned to one or more concrete precursor contri-bution nodes cpre from its referenced source paper 

dpre . For example, if a paper contributes “formal-izing multi-step entailment trees” and cites “multi-premise entailment” from Natural Language Infer-ence from Multiple Premises as a prerequisite, the aligner searches the contributions extracted from that source paper and identifies the best-matching precursor contribution, such as “multi-premise en-tailment task” (see Figure 1). The aligner then creates an edge from the precursor contribution to the dependent contribution, indicating that en-tailment trees build on multi-premise entailment .As in earlier steps, alignment is implemented as an instruction-formatted language-model call. The prompt includes task desiderata, the dependent con-tribution cdep , the candidate prerequisite pk, and all extracted contributions from dpre , where the model selects the contribution(s) that best align. Align-ment is modeled as one-to-many because a single prerequisite reference may correspond to multiple concrete contributions in the source paper. 

Extraction Model and Cost: All extraction stages use GPT-OSS-120B, chosen for its long-context performance and permissive open weights. To max-imize quality, batch processing is not used; con-tributions and alignments are processed individu-ally where possible. Each paper therefore requires many LLM calls: one for contribution extraction, 8.9 on average for prerequisite extraction, and one per prerequisite edge for alignment, with 6.1 pre-requisites per contribution on average (61% from other papers; 33% internal, and 6% artifacts). In practice, this can exceed 40 calls per paper, at an estimated cost of $0.10 per paper at current rates. 

Search Embeddings: To support fast search, the API includes Q WEN 3-E MBEDDING -0.6B embed-dings for all 2M contribution nodes, generated from concatenated contribution names and descriptions. 

4.3 Evaluation 

A targeted validation was conducted to measure adherence to contribution and prerequisite extrac-tion desiderata. Reference sets were constructed according to these desiderata and compared to model-generated extractions. Results, detailed be-low, show high overall precision and recall for both scientific contribution and prerequisite extraction. 

4.3.1 Contribution Extraction 

Contribution extraction was evaluated using a man-ual reference set constructed according to the same desiderata in the extraction prompt, including gran-ularity and specificity requirements. Across 25 papers, a domain expert identified 163 contribu-tions, while the extraction pipeline identified 226 contributions. As extracted contributions may dif-fer in specificity – a single coarse contribution may correspond to several more atomic contributions, and vice versa – evaluation is modeled as a many-to-many alignment problem. The five alignment classes and their proportions are shown in Table 2. For each paper, model-extracted contributions were aligned to the manually identified contribu-tions and assigned one of five alignment classes: direct match, higher-resolution decomposition, coarser decomposition, additional valid contribu-tion, or missed contribution. Model contributions without a corresponding manual contribution were reviewed and counted as additional valid contribu-tions when they satisfied the extraction desiderata. Manually identified contributions with no aligned model contribution were counted as missed contri-butions. Proportions are calculated over the union of valid model and manual contributions. The results in Table 2 show overall strong perfor-mance: 91% of manually identified contributions were successfully extracted by the model, while 9% were missed. The model also identified many 5additional valid contributions (25%), most often secondary contributions such as follow-on exper-iments or analyses missed during manual label-ing, and frequently produced higher-resolution de-compositions of coarser manual annotations (19%). Taken together, these results indicate high overall performance at extracting scientific contributions. 

4.4 Prerequisite Identification 

Prerequisite identification quality was evaluated manually using the same desiderata specified in the extraction prompt. For 25 scientific contributions, the domain expert identified 91 prerequisite contri-butions by examining the source paper text, then compared these manually identified prerequisites to the 149 prerequisites generated by the extrac-tion pipeline. To avoid missing prerequisites, the prompt encourages high recall while also distin-guishing between core or direct prerequisites and valid but less direct peripheral prerequisites. Of the 149 prerequisites identified by the extraction pipeline, 96 were labeled by the pipeline as core prerequisites and 53 as peripheral prerequisites. Each model-extracted prerequisite was manually labeled as core , peripheral , or incorrect by the do-main expert. Manual evaluation labeled 93% of prerequisites labeled core by the pipeline as core ,increasing to 97% when peripheral prerequisites are also counted as valid. Prerequisites labeled 

peripheral by the pipeline were most often also judged peripheral: 58% were labeled peripheral ,and 87% were labeled either core or peripheral .Only 7% of extracted prerequisites (10 of 149) were labeled incorrect , primarily cases where the candidate prerequisite was only weakly related or where the dependency direction was reversed. The manual evaluation identified 9 additional missed prerequisites not recovered by the pipeline, suggest-ing high recall (94%) for prerequisite extraction. 

5 Task: Predicting Technological Requirements 

New scientific advances frequently build upon existing advances: for example, transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) were built upon precursors such as sequence-to-sequence models, attention mechanisms, and word embeddings. The S CIEN - 

> TIFIC

CONTRIBUTION GRAPH maps such prereq-uisite relationships, and using these we can build a task to evaluate how well literature-backed auto-mated scientific discovery systems could predict which existing technologies would be needed to develop a new target technology. 

Task Framing: We operationalize the technolog-ical requirement identification task as a ranking task, which mirrors likely deployment scenarios: given a desired new technology, and a list of cur-rent technological capabilities, the model must rank candidates such that the most relevant prerequisites for developing the target technology appear high-est. Evaluation is operationalized as temporally filtered backtesting (e.g. Jansen et al., 2025a; Luo et al., 2018), where we measure a model’s task performance primarily on unseen problems (from papers published after its advertised knowledge cut-off date), which effectively allows evaluating “new” technologies unknown to the model. This form of backtesting is typically used in high-cost domains (such as scientific discovery) where evaluating hun-dreds or thousands of new discoveries would be prohibitively expensive or infeasible at scale. 

Data: We construct 2,000 technological require-ment problems by randomly sampling target sci-entific contributions from each year in 2021–2025. Each problem consists of a target technology and a ranked list of 100 candidate prerequisite technolo-gies . Both targets and candidates are scientific con-tributions from the graph, represented using their 

name and description fields. For each sampled tar-get technology, gold prerequisites are drawn from its incoming prerequisite edges in the graph. The remaining candidates are close distractors selected to mirror likely search scenarios: the target name and description are used as an embedding search query over the graph, and the highest-scoring scien-tific contributions by cosine similarity are returned. Distractors are temporally filtered so that no candi-date postdates the target technology; for example, a target from 2024 cannot include distractors from 2025. To reduce false positives, we also remove candidate distractors from papers that contain di-rect graph edges to other scientific contributions in the same source paper as the target. 

Models: We evaluate a suite of high-performing LLMs using a shared instruction-formatted prompt containing the task description, target technology, and 100 candidate technologies in random order. Each model returns a ranked list in which the most relevant prerequisites appear highest. Because can-didates may include both direct prerequisites and more distant related technologies, models are in-structed to prefer more immediate precursors; for 6Knowledge Performance Performance Perf. # Samples Perf. Cost Base Model Cutoff (pre-cutoff) (post-cutoff) ∆ (pre/post) (entire set) (per 1k)                                                                              

> RANDOM BASELINE –––––/– 0.12 $0 GPT-4 O-MINI Oct 2023 0.16 0.14 0.02 617 / 1279 0.15 $16 GPT-OSS-120B Jun 2024 0.25 0.22 0.03 845 / 1076 0.23 $20 GPT-5-NANO May 2024 0.25 0.22 0.03 817 / 1090 0.23 $5 GPT-5.4-MINI Aug 2025 0.37 0.33 0.04 1364 / 205 0.36 $29 GPT-5-MINI May 2024 0.42 0.36 0.06 817 / 1090 0.38 $22 GPT-5.4 Aug 2025 0.40 0.37 0.03 1364 / 205 0.39 $106 CLAUDE HAIKU 4.5 Jun 2025 0.41 0.38 0.03 1337 / 272 0.40 $45 CLAUDE SONNET 4.5 Jul 2025 0.45 0.40 0.05 1337 / 272 0.43 $160 CLAUDE OPUS 4.6 Aug 2025 0.53 0.48 0.05 1364 / 205 0.51 $235

Table 3: Model performance on the technological requirement identification task, reported using temporally-filtered backtesting, where model performance pre- and post- each model’s advertised knowledge cutoff is evaluated. Performance is measured using Mean Average Precision (MAP). Cost is reported in USD per 1,000 problems. Sums of samples (pre/post) may not add to 2000, as problems where only publication years are available (and not specific dates) are discarded when they have the same year as the model’s knowledge cutoff to prevent contamination. 

example, for a “transformers” target, attention mechanisms should rank above Markov models .

Results: Table 3 reports model performance on the technological requirement identification task, us-ing mean average precision (MAP; Manning et al., 2008), both overall, and split by a dynamic tempo-ral filter (i.e. backtesting) based on whether each problem’s source paper was published before or after the model’s advertised knowledge cutoff. The results suggest that recent models are rapidly gaining performance on the technological require-ment identification task. While models released approximately two years ago, such as GPT-4 O-

> MINI

, perform only slightly above a random base-line (0.14 vs. 0.12 MAP), the best-performing re-cent model, C LAUDE OPUS 4.6, achieves 0.48 MAP on unseen problems, indicating moderate overall task performance. This performance comes at substantial cost, and the model suite reveals large cost/performance tradeoffs: GPT-5-MINI achieves 1% MAP per $0.61, while C LAUDE OPUS 4.6 costs $4.90 per 1% MAP. Backtesting reveals models generally perform somewhat better on prediction problems generated from papers published before the model’s advertised knowledge cutoff. Perfor-mance typically increases by 0.02–0.06 MAP on pre-cutoff problems, suggesting that some overall performance may reflect prior exposure to the rele-vant literature during model pretraining, rather than purely prospective technological reasoning, though this increase is generally modest across models. 

6 Discussion 

As a resource, the S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION 

GRAPH enables technologies to be traced back-ward through successive precursor contributions. We expect that the scale and granularity will sup-port downstream investigations challenging to per-form with paper-level citation graphs or triple-level graphs alone, including technological roadmap-ping, impact assessment, and novelty detection. 

Technological Roadmapping: The S CIENTIFIC 

CONTRIBUTION GRAPH provides a large-scale technological roadmap, showing how component technologies and findings are combined, extended, and reused in later scientific contributions. This makes it possible to study how technologies emerge from prior work, and visualize local trajectories of scientific development. For example, Figure 2 shows how the Bidirectional Encoder Representa-tions from Transformers (BERT) architecture (De-vlin et al., 2019) was built from precursor contribu-tions, and how those precursors themselves depend on earlier scientific contributions. 

Impact Assessment: Assessing the impact of a sci-entific contribution is challenging and costly, and often approximated using inexpensive but noisy paper-level citation counts – a citing paper may use a contribution directly, cite it as background, or re-flect broader citation biases (Balzer and Benlahlou, 2025; Teplitskiy et al., 2022; Larivière and Gingras, 2010). The S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION GRAPH 

enables a more direct contribution-level view by tracing downstream contributions that build on it, or new subfields that emerge. For example, A P- 

> PENDIX

B includes large impact assessments of 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG ) (Lewis et al., 2020) and S ELF -I NSTRUCT PROMPTING 

(Wang et al., 2023), illustrating how these create novel subfields in internet-augmented prompts and 

fusion-in-decoder QA models for RAG, or self-rewarding language models and automatic data-

7Bidirectional Transformer encoder architecture (BERT) 

BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional... 

Transformer: attention ‑only encoder ‑decoder architecture 

Attention is All you Need 

Wordpiece sub ‑word segmentation for open ‑vocabulary NMT 

Google's Neural Machine Translation System:... 

ELMo: Deep Contextualized Word Representations 

Deep contextualized word representations 

Pretrained Bidirectional Language Model Architecture 

Deep contextualized word representations 

Residual Learning Framework 

Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition 

Parameter ‑Free Identity Shortcut Connections 

Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition 

Open ‑vocabulary neural machine translation using subword units 

Neural Machine Translation of Rare... 

Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) adapted for subword segmentation in NMT 

Neural Machine Translation of Rare... Joint BPE segmentation for cross ‑lingual subword consistency 

Neural Machine Translation of Rare... 

Open ‑source subword ‑nmt toolkit for BPE ‑based segmentation 

Neural Machine Translation of Rare... 

One Billion Word Benchmark Corpus and Evaluation Suite 

One billion word benchmark for measuri... Negative Sampling training objective 

Distributed Representations of Wo... 

Phrase Skip-gram model 

Distributed Representations of Wo... GloVe: Global Log ‑Bilinear Regression Model for Word Embeddings 

GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation 

Open ‑Source Implementation and Pre ‑trained Word Vectors Release 

GloVe: Global Vectors for Word Representation 

Highway Network Architecture with Adaptive Gating 

Training Very Deep Networks 

Character-level CNN ‑highway ‑LSTM language model 

Character-Aware Neural Language Models 

Bidirectional LSTM based generic context embedding architecture (context2vec) 

*context2vec:* Learning Generic Context... 

Layer Normalization Technique 

Layer Normalization 

Layer Normalization for Recurrent Neural Networks 

Layer Normalization 

Context Vectors (CoVe): contextualized word representations from a pretrained MT encoder 

Learned in Translation: Contextualized Word... 

Reproducible Data Preprocessing Pipeline for the 1 ‑Billion ‑Word Benchmark 

One billion word benchmark for measuri... 

Highway Network Architecture with Transform and Carry Gates 

Highway Networks 

Projected LSTM architecture for large-scale language modeling 

Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling 

Training methodology combining truncated BPTT, AdaGrad, and importance ‑sampling softmax 

Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling 

State-of-the-art 30.0 perplexity on the One Billion Word Benchmark with 20× fewer parameters 

Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling 

Importance ‑sampling based loss for training language models with very large vocabularies 

Exploring the Limits of Language Modeling 

TagLM: semi ‑supervised language ‑model ‑augmented sequence tagging framework 

Semi-supervised sequence tagging with... 

Bidirectional LM embeddings consistently outperform forward-only embeddings 

Semi-supervised sequence tagging with... 

Variance ‑preserving weight initialization for rectifier networks (He initialization) 

Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassin... 

Very deep ConvNet architectures (A–E) built from 3×3 filters 

Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Sc... 

Inception module architecture 

Going deeper with convolutions 

Auxiliary classifiers for improved gradient flow and regularization 

Going deeper with convolutions 

Batch Normalization Transform (Algorithm) 

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep... 

Scale ‑Invariance and Jacobian Conditioning of Batch ‑Normalized Layers 

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep... 

Feature ‑Map ‑wise Batch Normalization for Convolutional Layers 

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep... 

Training and Inference Procedure Using Mini ‑Batch and Population Statistics 

Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep... 

Soft attention mechanism for differentiable alignment 

Neural Machine Translation by Jointl... 

Bidirectional RNN encoder producing source annotations 

Neural Machine Translation by Jointl... 

Joint end ‑to ‑end training of attention and translation 

Neural Machine Translation by Jointl... 

Alignment-augmented training data for rare-word handling 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

Post ‑processing OOV replacement using bilingual dictionary or copy 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

CHRF3: recall-weighted variant of CHRF ( β=3) 

CHRF: character n-gram F-score for automatic... 

Qualitative analysis of regular character ‑level transformations learned by the model 

Character-based PSMT for Closely Related... 

Biased importance ‑sampling training algorithm for NMT with very large target vocabularies 

On Using Very Large Target Vocabulary for... 

ADADELTA adaptive learning ‑rate algorithm 

ADADELTA: An Adaptive Learning Rate Method 

Unit ‑consistent derivation of the ADADELTA update rule 

ADADELTA: An Adaptive Learning Rate Method 

Copyable rare-word annotation scheme 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

Positional-All (PosAll) rare ‑word annotation scheme 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

Positional-Unknown (PosUnk) rare ‑word annotation scheme 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

Architecture ‑agnostic rare ‑word handling framework for NMT 

Addressing the Rare Word Problem in Neural... 

UNK-token replacement using attention alignments and external dictionary 

On Using Very Large Target Vocabulary for... 

End ‑to ‑end phrase ‑based SMT pipeline for ten WMT ‑2015 language pairs 

The Edinburgh/JHU Phrase-based Machine... 

Unsupervised transliteration mining algorithm 

Integrating an Unsupervised... 

Character-level phrase-based transliteration model trained on mined pairs 

Integrating an Unsupervised... Skip-gram model for learning word embeddings 

Efficient Estimation of Word Representations ... 

Explicit high ‑dimensional sparse word vectors from Wikipedia using PPMI 

Linguistic Regularities in Sparse and Explici... 

Vector offset algorithm for word analogy solving 

Linguistic Regularities in Continuous Space W... 

Additive compositional morphological word representations 

Compositional Morphology for Word Representati... 

Additive Log ‑Bilinear Language Model (LBL++) 

Compositional Morphology for Word Representati... 

Language ‑independent morphological factorisation using unsupervised Morfessor 

Compositional Morphology for Word Representati... 

Deep character-level ConvNet architecture for text classification 

Character-level Convolutional Network... 

Continuous Bag ‑of ‑Words (CBOW) model for learning word embeddings 

Efficient Estimation of Word Representations ... 

Stack-LSTM transition-based chunking model for NER 

Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition 

State-of-the-art multilingual NER without language-specific resources 

Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition 

Encoder–decoder LSTM architecture for general sequence-to-sequence learning 

Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural... 

Deep LSTMs outperform shallow LSTMs in sequence-to-sequence translation 

Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural... 

BLSTM ‑CNNs ‑CRF end ‑to ‑end sequence labeling architecture 

End-to-end Sequence Labeling via... 

GRU ‑Based Hierarchical RNN with Max ‑Margin CRF Objective 

Transfer Learning for Sequence Tagging with... 

from large unlabeled corpora using a pairwise ranking criterion 

Natural Language Processing (Almost) f... 

model for NER 

Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition 

Combined character-level and pretrained word embeddings with dropout for NER 

Neural Architectures for Named Entity Recognition 

Hybrid BLSTM ‑CNN architecture for English NER 

<span id="page-0-0"></span>... 

Adam: Adaptive Moment Estimation Optimization Algorithm 

Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization 

State ‑of ‑the ‑art Large ‑Scale Recurrent Neural Network Language Model 

One billion word benchmark for measuri... 

Engineering Techniques for Fast Large-Scale RNN Language Model Training 

One billion word benchmark for measuri... 

Multilingual annotated NER corpus for English and German 

Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 Shared Tas... 

Standardized NER evaluation metrics with IOB tagging, precision, recall, and F1 

Introduction to the CoNLL-2003 Shared Tas... Figure 2: A simplified visualization of the technological roadmap showing precursor technologies that led to the development of the “Bidirectional Transformer Encoder Architecture (BERT)” contribution, one of 12 fine-grained contributions extracted from Devlin et al. (2019). Here, nodes represent contributions, while edges represent precursor relations. All content has been simplified for space: nodes show only contribution names and source paper titles, and not detailed contribution descriptions or metadata; edges do not show precursor descriptions or explanations, and cross-edges between nodes other than the root have been pruned to form a tree for visualization purposes. Precursor relations are shown up to 3 edges away from the root contribution. 

poisoning pipelines for S ELF -I NSTRUCT . Such analyses may support automated scientific discov-ery by identifying contribution types that enable high-impact downstream work. They may also help researchers document specific technologies or findings developed from their work, but obscured across citation layers, for example in promotion and tenure cases. This may be through direct tex-tual narratives enabled through these automated impact analyses, or by reporting counts of new sci-entific contributions enabled, directly or indirectly, from one’s own scientific contributions. 

7 Conclusion 

This work presents the S CIENTIFIC CONTRIBU -

TION GRAPH , a large-scale resource for techno-logical roadmapping that represents over 2 million scientific contributions extracted from 230k source papers, together with 12 million prerequisite rela-tionships that define how each technology builds upon prior contributions. We also formulate tech-nological prerequisite prediction as a downstream evaluation task, and empirically demonstrate that when evaluated using temporally-filtered backtest-ing, current language models are increasingly able to identify precursor technologies needed to de-velop new target technologies, suggesting near-term applications in automated scientific discovery. More broadly, we anticipate that the S CIENTIFIC 

CONTRIBUTION GRAPH will support applications in technological roadmapping, impact assessment, novelty detection, and the study of scientific devel-opment. This work is released as open source. 8Limitations 

Cost vs Performance: The scientific contribution extraction system for knowledge graph construc-tion described in this work has a cost/performance tradeoff that is visible at scale. While the current GPT-OSS-120B extraction pipeline obtains very strong performance, it is possible that higher per-formance could be obtained by using more expen-sive models, though this is limited by scaling. The current scale of the graph (230k source papers) rep-resents approximately $20,000 in compute costs, though these costs are likely to be mitigated as future open source models return increased perfor-mance with lower compute costs. 

Open Access Articles: While the extraction sys-tem described in this work can be used on any scien-tific articles that an organization has access to, the official release includes only open access articles for licensing reasons. While this is not a signifi-cant limitation in the current release domain (natu-ral language processing and artificial intelligence), as much of this domains literature is open access, many high-impact domains such as biology, mate-rials science, and others, have a large proportion of closed-access literature that limit downstream ap-plications including automated scientific discovery. While this limitation is mitigated by users bringing their own licensed articles, the move towards open-access publishing will help share publicly funded knowledge more freely, and enable further societal benefit by making it easier and more accessible to build further contributions upon those discoveries. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was developed with funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency’s (DARPA) SciFy program (Agreement No. HR00112520300) to PJ at the University of Arizona. The views expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official policy or po-sition of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government. PJ has an outside interest in the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence. This interest has been disclosed to the University of Arizona and re-viewed in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. We thank the members of the DARPA Scientific Feasibility (SciFy) program and the Asta group at Ai2 for thoughtful discussions. 

References 

Waleed Ammar, Dirk Groeneveld, Chandra Bhagavat-ula, Iz Beltagy, Miles Crawford, Doug Downey, Ja-son Dunkelberger, Ahmed Elgohary, Sergey Feldman, Vu Ha, Rodney Kinney, Sebastian Kohlmeier, Kyle Lo, Tyler Murray, Hsu-Han Ooi, Matthew Peters, Joanna Power, Sam Skjonsberg, Lucy Lu Wang, and 4 others. 2018. Construction of the literature graph in semantic scholar. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 3 (Industry Papers) ,pages 84–91, New Orleans - Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jinheon Baek, Sujay Kumar Jauhar, Silviu Cucerzan, and Sung Ju Hwang. 2025. ResearchAgent: Iterative research idea generation over scientific literature with large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 6709–6738, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Balzer and Adhen Benlahlou. 2025. Mitigating consequences of prestige in citations of publications. 

Scientometrics , pages 1–28. Eugenio Cesario, Carmela Comito, and Ester Zumpano. 2024. A survey of the recent trends in deep learn-ing for literature based discovery in the biomedical domain. Neurocomputing , 568:127079. Gamal Crichton, Simon Baker, Yufan Guo, and Anna Korhonen. 2020. Neural networks for open and closed literature-based discovery. PloS one ,15(5):e0232891. John Dagdelen, Alexander Dunn, Sanghoon Lee, Nicholas Walker, Andrew S Rosen, Gerbrand Ceder, Kristin A Persson, and Anubhav Jain. 2024. Struc-tured information extraction from scientific text with large language models. Nature communications ,15(1):1418. Abhipsha Das, Nicholas Lourie, Siavash Golkar, and Mariel Pettee. 2025. What’s in your field? mapping scientific research with knowledge graphs and large language models. ArXiv , abs/2503.09894. D. Dessí, Francesco Osborne, D. Recupero, D. Buscaldi, and E. Motta. 2022. Scicero: A deep learning and nlp approach for generating scientific knowledge graphs in the computer science domain. Knowl. Based Syst. ,258:109945. Danilo Dessí, Francesco Osborne, Davide Buscaldi, Diego Reforgiato Recupero, and Enrico Motta. 2025. Cs-kg 2.0: A large-scale knowledge graph of com-puter science. Scientific Data , 12(1):964. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of 

9deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jennifer D’Souza, Sören Auer, and Ted Pedersen. 2021. SemEval-2021 task 11: NLPContributionGraph -structuring scholarly NLP contributions for a re-search knowledge graph. In Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2021) , pages 364–376, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joy He-Yueya, Anikait Singh, Ge Gao, Michael Y Li, Sherry Yang, Chelsea Finn, Emma Brunskill, and Noah D Goodman. 2026. Giants: Generative insight anticipation from scientific literature. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.09793 .Sarthak Jain, Madeleine van Zuylen, Hannaneh Ha-jishirzi, and Iz Beltagy. 2020. SciREX: A challenge dataset for document-level information extraction. In 

Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 7506– 7516, Online. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Peter Jansen, Samiah Hassan, and Ruoyao Wang. 2025a. Matter-of-fact: A benchmark for verifying the fea-sibility of literature-supported claims in materials science. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 4090–4102, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Marissa Radensky, Pao Siangliulue, Tom Hope, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Bod-hisattwa Prasad Majumder, Daniel S Weld, and Pe-ter Clark. 2025b. CodeScientist: End-to-end semi-automated scientific discovery with code-based ex-perimentation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 13370– 13467, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Vincent Larivière and Yves Gingras. 2010. The im-pact factor’s matthew effect: A natural experiment in bibliometrics. Journal of the American society for information science and technology , 61(2):424–427. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In NeurIPS .Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yum-ing Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. 2025. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via novel idea development with LLM agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 8971–9004, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiangci Li, Biswadip Mandal, and Jessica Ouyang. 2022. CORWA: A citation-oriented related work annotation dataset. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference of the North American Chapter of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 5426–5440, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Xiangci Li and Jessica Ouyang. 2024. Related work and citation text generation: A survey. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 13846–13864, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Kin-ney, and Daniel Weld. 2020. S2ORC: The semantic scholar open research corpus. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 4969–4983, Online. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foer-ster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. 2024. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific dis-covery. Preprint , arXiv:2408.06292. Yi Luan, Luheng He, Mari Ostendorf, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2018. Multi-task identification of entities, relations, and coreference for scientific knowledge graph construction. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3219–3232, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fan Luo, Marco A. Valenzuela-Escárcega, Gus Hahn-Powell, and Mihai Surdeanu. 2018. Scientific dis-covery as link prediction in influence and citation graphs. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Workshop on Graph-Based Methods for Natural Language Pro-cessing (TextGraphs-12) , pages 1–6, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Ian Magnusson and Scott Friedman. 2021. Extracting fine-grained knowledge graphs of scientific claims: Dataset and transformer-based results. In Proceed-ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4651–4658, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hin-rich Schütze. 2008. Introduction to Information Re-trieval . Cambridge University Press. Ishani Mondal, Yufang Hou, and Charles Jochim. 2021. End-to-end construction of NLP knowledge graph. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 1885–1895, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

10 Shahzad Nazir, Muhammad Asif, Shahbaz Ahmad, Faisal Bukhari, M. Afzal, and Hanan Aljuaid. 2020. Important citation identification by exploiting con-tent and section-wise in-text citation count. PLoS ONE , 15. Wolfgang Otto, Matthäus Zloch, Lu Gan, Saurav Kar-makar, and Stefan Dietze. 2023. GSAP-NER: A novel task, corpus, and baseline for scholarly entity extraction focused on machine learning models and datasets. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 8166–8176, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Aniket Pramanick, Yufang Hou, Saif M. Mohammad, and Iryna Gurevych. 2025. The nature of NLP: Ana-lyzing contributions in NLP papers. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 25169–25191, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yiyuan Pu, Daniel Beck, and Karin Verspoor. 2023. Graph embedding-based link prediction for literature-based discovery in alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 145:104464. Marissa Radensky, Simra Shahid, Raymond Fok, Pao Siangliulue, Tom Hope, and Daniel S Weld. 2024. Scideator: Human-llm scientific idea generation grounded in research-paper facet recombination. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14634 .Mahsa Shamsabadi, Jennifer D’Souza, and Sören Auer. 2024. Large language models for scientific informa-tion extraction: An empirical study for virology. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: EACL 2024 , pages 374–392, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ NLP researchers. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014. Se-quence to sequence learning with neural networks. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 27. Don R. Swanson. 1986. Fish oil, raynaud’s syndrome, and undiscovered public knowledge. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 30(1):7–18. Don R Swanson. 1988. Migraine and magnesium: eleven neglected connections. Perspectives in bi-ology and medicine , 31(4):526–557. Misha Teplitskiy, Eamon Duede, Michael Menietti, and Karim R Lakhani. 2022. How status of research pa-pers affects the way they are read and cited. Research policy , 51(4):104484. Marco Valenzuela, Vu A. Ha, and Oren Etzioni. 2015. Identifying meaningful citations. In AAAI Workshop: Scholarly Big Data .Rosni Vasu, Chandrayee Basu, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Cristina Sarasua, Peter Clark, and Abraham Bern-stein. 2025. HypER: Literature-grounded hypothesis generation and distillation with provenance. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 25424– 25449, Suzhou, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 30. Yifan Wang, Yiping Song, Shuai Li, Chaoran Cheng, Wei Ju, Ming Zhang, and Sheng Wang. 2022. Dis-encite: Graph-based disentangled representation learning for context-specific citation generation. In 

AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 13484–13508, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Fang Zhang and Shengli Wu. 2021. Measuring aca-demic entities’ impact by content-based citation anal-ysis in a heterogeneous academic network. Sciento-metrics , 126:7197 – 7222. 

A Contribution Categories 

The list of contribution categories used in the ex-traction is shown in Table 4. 

B Impact Graphs 

Example impact assessment graphs are shown for 

Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) in Figure 3, and Self-Instruct Bootstrapping in Figure 4. 11 Category Description 

problem_formulation Reconceiving a task in a novel way, or identifying new angles or perspectives on long-standing problems. Can also be used to propose a new kind of task. 

theoretical_insight Proposing new theories, either from deriving theoretical results or directly from empirical or analysis results. 

conceptual_framework Developing high-level conceptual frameworks that help guide future research. 

resource_benchmark Creating a new benchmark that evaluates model performance on a task. 

resource_dataset Creating new datasets that are primarily generic resources, without the inten-tion of being used as a benchmark (i.e., without training/evaluation sets). 

tool_system_software Software, tools, systems, code, or other artifacts whose primary purpose is to be used by other researchers. 

empirical_evaluation Presenting novel empirical results discovered through experimentation, such as by running a model on a benchmark. 

analysis Presenting novel analyses of data that yield new insights. 

models_or_architectures Proposing completely novel model designs, or modifications to existing models or architectures. 

techniques_algorithms Introducing new learning algorithms, optimization techniques, or other algo-rithmic contributions. 

representational Novel ways to represent or encode data. 

research_methods_procedures Establishing novel experimental protocols, methods, or procedures for con-ducting aspects of research. 

metrics_instruments Developing novel evaluation metrics or protocols for assessment. 

position_statement Articulating a clear position on a debated topic, supported by evidence or argumentation. 

real_world_application Demonstrations that a research idea works in a practical, real-world setting. 

society_ethics_policy Addressing ethical, societal, and/or policy-related issues. 

other Any other type of scientific contribution or claim not covered here. 

Table 4: While scientific contribution extraction categories are unrestricted, the above categories of scientific contributions are provided in the extraction schema as examples to ground the fine-grained granularity of the contribution extraction step. 

12 Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation (RAG) framework 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation for... 10620 hidden contributions 

Fusion-in-Decoder (FiD) architecture for retrieval-augmented generative QA 

Leveraging Passage Retrieval with... 

Empirical evaluation of open ‑book and closed ‑book ODQA models on overlap ‑stratified test subsets 

Question and Answer Test-Train Overlap in... 

Open ‑source implementation of KATE 

What Makes Good In-Context Examples f... 

Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation (RAG) adapted for knowledge ‑grounded multi ‑turn dialogue 

Retrieval Augmentation Reduces Hallucination... 

Comprehensive empirical analysis of retrieval components for knowledge ‑grounded dialogue 

Retrieval Augmentation Reduces Hallucination... 

Internet ‑augmented dialogue generation architecture 

Internet-Augmented Dialogue Generation 

Built-in indexing utilities via FAISS and ElasticSearch 

Abstract 

Comprehensive Empirical Evaluation and Analysis of Generative QA Models under Knowledge Conflicts 

Entity-Based Knowledge Conflicts in Question... 

Few-shot prompting for Internet-augmented language models (no fine ‑tuning) 

Internet-augmented language models throu... 

SERAC: Semi ‑Parametric Model Editing with Retrieval ‑Augmented Counterfactuals 

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale 

Re2G architecture (Retrieve ‑Rerank ‑Generate) 

Re2G: Retrieve, Rerank, Generate 

RECITE paradigm: recitation-augmented generation for closed-book QA 

Recitation-Augmented Language Models 

Self ‑ask integration with an external search engine 

Measuring and Narrowing the Compositionality ... 

IRCoT: Interleaved Retrieval and Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for Multi-step Open-Domain QA 

Interleaving Retrieval with Chain-of-Thought... 

Adaptive Retrieval: popularity ‑driven selective augmentation 

When Not to Trust Language Models:... 

REPLUG: Black ‑Box Retrieval ‑Augmented Language Modeling Framework 

REPLUG: Retrieval-Augmented... 

FLAREinstruct: Retrieval ‑Instruction Prompting Variant 

Active Retrieval Augmented Generation 

AutoGen conceptual framework for multi ‑agent LLM applications 

AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM... 

Taxonomy of Retrieval ‑Based Language Model Architectures 

Tutorial Proposal: Retrieval-based Langu... 

Self ‑Reflective Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation (Self ‑RAG) framework 

Self-RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, a... 

Comprehensive analysis of retrieval techniques for Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation (RAG) 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Large... 

Systematic study of document-type impact on RAG effectiveness 

The Power of Noise: Redefining Retrieval ... 

GraphRAG framework for global query-focused summarization 

From Local to Global: A Graph RAG Approach to... Unified Taxonomy of Retrieval ‑Augmented LLM Components and Design Choices 

A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards... 

ReSearch framework: RL ‑based reasoning with search for LLMs 

ReSearch: Learning to Reason with Search fo... 1049 hidden contributions 

PAQ: 65  Mautomatically generated QA ‑pair knowledge base 

PAQ: 65 Million Probably-Asked Questi... 

Open ‑source release of PAQ resources (data, models, and code) 

PAQ: 65 Million Probably-Asked Questi... 

Public release of TOPIOCQA dataset, code, and annotation interfaces 

TopiOCQA: Open-domain Conversational Questi... 

SEGENC: Segment ‑Encoder End ‑to ‑End Query ‑Focused Summarization Model 

Exploring Neural Models for Query-Focused... 

QAMPARI benchmark for open-domain multi-answer question answering 

QAMPARI: A Benchmark for Open-domain Questions... 

SLED: Sliding ‑Encoder and Decoder framework for long ‑text processing 

Efficient Long-Text Understanding with... 

GenRead: generate ‑then ‑read pipeline for knowledge ‑intensive tasks 

Generate rather than Retrieve: Large Langu... 

Hybrid retrieval ‑generation system 

Generate rather than Retrieve: Large Langu... 

DocPrompting: Retrieval ‑augmented NL ‑to ‑code generation framework 

DocPrompting: Generating Code by Retrieving th... 

Retrieval ‑augmented personalization framework with In ‑Prompt Augmentation (IPA) and Fusion ‑in ‑Decoder... 

LaMP: When Large Language Models Meet... 

Task ‑specific prompt template design for integrating retrieved user profile entries 

LaMP: When Large Language Models Meet... 

Parallel Context Windows (PCW) technique 

Parallel Context Windows for Large Language... 

Evaluation framework for probing LLM factual knowledge boundaries 

Investigating the Factual Knowledge... 

RoG: Planning ‑Retrieval ‑Reasoning framework for LLM ‑KG integration 

Reasoning on Graphs: Faithful and... 

FiD ‑style multi ‑path encoding and LLM reasoning over retrieved KG paths 

Reasoning on Graphs: Faithful and... 85 hidden contributions 

Systematic quantification of train–test overlap in popular NLP benchmarks 

Memorization vs. Generalization:... 

Task-agnostic similarity-based framework for quantifying train-test data leakage 

Memorization vs. Generalization:... 267 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source toolkit and grammars for rapid semantic ‑parser prototyping 

Constrained Language Models Yield Few-Shot... 

OpenICL open ‑source framework for in ‑context learning 

OpenICL: An Open-Source Framework for In-cont... 

Opinion-based prompting for context ‑faithful LLM inference 

Context-faithful Prompting for Large... 

Fine ‑Tuned Relation Representation Retrieval 

GPT-RE: In-context Learning for Relation... 

Impact of Retrieval Models on Demonstration Effectiveness in In-Context Learning 

Revisiting Demonstration Selection Strategies ... 364 hidden contributions 

Conceptual framework of imitative falsehoods 

TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Huma... 

FACTSCORE metric for factual precision of long-form generation 

FACTSCORE: Fine-grained Atomic Evaluation of... 

Med-HALT benchmark framework for evaluating medical hallucinations in LLMs 

Med-HALT: Medical Domain Hallucination Test fo... 

LOCOMO: Very-long-term multimodal dialogue dataset and benchmark 

Evaluating Very Long-Term Conversatio... 

SubgraphRAG: two ‑stage KG ‑based Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation framework 

Simple is Effective: The Roles of Graphs and... 133 hidden contributions 

SelfCheckGPT Sampling ‑Consistency Framework 

SELFCHECKGPT: Zero-Resource Black-B... 84 hidden contributions 

SeeKeR modular architecture (Search →

Knowledge → Response) using a single transformer 

Language Models that Seek for Knowledge:... 

FITS dataset: Human-bot dialogues with fine-grained modular feedback 

Learning New Skills after Deployment:... 

Trainable query rewriter model 

Query Rewriting for Retrieval-Augmented... 33 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source release of NL ‑Augmenter code, data cards, and robustness evaluation artifacts 

NL-Augmenter A Framework for Task-Sensitive... 

Public Pool of Prompts (P3) dataset 

PromptSource: An Integrated Developmen... LLAMAFACTORY unified fine ‑tuning framework 

LLAMAFACTORY: Unified Efficient Fine-Tuning... 138 hidden contributions Disentangled QA task formulation 

DisentQA: Disentangling Parametric and... 

Empirical finding: Strong confirmation bias when both supportive and contradictory evidence are present 

Adaptive Chameleon or Stubborn Sloth:... 

CONFLICTINGQA dataset of controversial yes/no questions with opposing evidence 

What Evidence Do Language Models Find... 

Contextual Information ‑Entropy Constraint Decoding (COIECD) algorithm 

Discerning and Resolving Knowledge Conflicts... 

Systematic analysis of causes, model behaviours and mitigation strategies for each knowledge ‑conflict... 

Knowledge Conflicts for LLMs: A Survey 34 hidden contributions 

FRESHPROMPT: Few-Shot Search-Engine Augmented Prompting 

FRESHLLMS: Refreshing Large Language Models... 

Adaptive-RAG adaptive retrieval-augmented generation framework 

Adaptive-RAG: Learning to Adapt... 

Automatic query ‑complexity classifier with silver ‑label generation 

Adaptive-RAG: Learning to Adapt... 143 hidden contributions 

Formal problem definition and taxonomy for LLM model editing 

Editing Large Language Models: Problems,... 

Comprehensive empirical benchmark and analysis of model editing methods on LLMs 

Editing Large Language Models: Problems,... 

Batch editing scalability analysis of model editing methods 

Editing Large Language Models: Problems,... 

Sequential editing scalability analysis of model editing methods 

Editing Large Language Models: Problems,... 

MeLLo: Memory ‑based knowledge editing for large language models 

MQUAKE: Assessing Knowledge Editing in... 

PokeMQA: Decoupled framework for knowledge editing in multi ‑hop question answering 

PokeMQA: Programmable knowledge editing for... 37 hidden contributions 

Systematic categorization of RAG enhancement techniques 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation for... 64 hidden contributions 

Position statement on ChatGPT hallucination issues 

A Multitask, Multilingual, Multimo... 97 hidden contributions 

INLINESEARCH Prompting (On ‑the ‑Fly Retrieval) 

Enabling Large Language Models to Generate Te... 

Multi-hop knowledge-editing evaluation formulation 

MQUAKE: Assessing Knowledge Editing in... 151 hidden contributions 

Active Retrieval Augmented Generation Framework 

Active Retrieval Augmented Generation 

ITER-RETGEN: Iterative Retrieval ‑Generation Synergy Framework 

Enhancing Retrieval-Augmented... 

DRAGIN: Dynamic Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation Framework Based on LLM Information Needs 

DRAGIN: Dynamic Retrieval Augmented... 195 hidden contributions 

Code ‑Style In ‑Context Learning (KB ‑Coder) for Knowledge ‑Base QA 

Code-Style In-Context Learning for... 

Comprehensive empirical evaluation of Adaptive ‑RAG 

Adaptive-RAG: Learning to Adapt... 158 hidden contributions 

LOGIC ‑LM neuro ‑symbolic reasoning framework 

LOGIC-LM: Empowering Large Language Models... 

FlashRAG open ‑source toolkit for Retrieval ‑Augmented Generation research 

FlashRAG: A Modular Toolkit for Efficient... 94 hidden contributions 

ed 

101 hidden contributions 

MAC ‑SQL multi ‑agent collaborative framework for Text ‑to ‑SQL 

MAC-SQL: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framewo... 32 hidden contributions 

MultiHop-RAG multi ‑hop RAG benchmark dataset 

MultiHop-RAG: Benchmarking... 420 hidden contributions 

Classification of Retrieval ‑Augmented LLM Training Paradigms 

A Survey on RAG Meeting LLMs: Towards... 341 hidden contributions 

LightRAG overall system design 

LightRAG: Simple and Fast Retrieval-Augmen... 25 hidden contributions 

HOLMES: Zero-shot, training-free multi-hop QA pipeline using query-focused hyper-relational KG 

HOLMES: Hyper-Relational Knowledge Graphs for... 195 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source LightRAG software package 

LightRAG: Simple and Fast Retrieval-Augmen... 

Comprehensive empirical evaluation of LightRAG on large ‑scale domain corpora 

LightRAG: Simple and Fast Retrieval-Augmen... 81 hidden contributions 

Knowledge Augmented Generation (KAG) framework 

KAG: Boosting LLMs in Professional Domains ... 

R1-Searcher: Two ‑stage outcome ‑based RL framework for autonomous retrieval in LLM reasoning 

R1-Searcher: Incentivizing the Sea... 16 hidden contributions 

DeepResearcher: End-to-end RL framework for LLM agents in live web search environments 

DeepResearcher: Scaling Deep Research via... 152 hidden contributions 

EntityQuestions benchmark dataset 

Simple Entity-Centric Questions Challenge... Synthetic identifiers (pseudo ‑queries) for generative retrieval 

Multiview Identifiers Enhanced Generative... 

MINDER: End-to-end generative retrieval system with multiview identifier generation and FM-index constrained decoding 

Multiview Identifiers Enhanced Generative... 

QuoteSum: Semi-Extractive Multi-Source QA Dataset and Benchmark 

SEMQA: Semi-Extractive Multi-Source Question... 91 hidden contributions 145 hidden contributions 

ConvGQR Integrated Generative Query Reformulation Framework 

ConvGQR: Generative Query Reformulation f... 19 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 

Unlimiformer: kNN ‑augmented cross ‑attention for unlimited ‑length inputs 

Unlimiformer: Long-Range Transformers with... 

Chunked encoding with overlapping windows for arbitrarily long inputs 

Unlimiformer: Long-Range Transformers with... 82 hidden contributions 41 hidden contributions 43 hidden contributions 45 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 53 hidden contributions 31 hidden contributions 59 hidden contributions 14 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 27 hidden contributions 19 hidden contributions 

Survey of ICL open-source tooling 

A Survey on In-context Learning 

Empirical benchmark of unsupervised demonstration ‑selection methods across multiple LLMs 

A Survey on In-context Learning 74 hidden contributions 

Large ‑scale empirical evaluation of eight LLMs on FLORES ‑101 multilingual MT 

Multilingual Machine Translation with Larg... 

Quantitative comparison of LLMs with supervised MMT baselines and Google Translate on FLORES-101 

Multilingual Machine Translation with Larg... 

Zero ‑resource language translation via in ‑context learning with XGLM 

Multilingual Machine Translation with Larg... 

LLMeBench open ‑source LLM benchmarking framework 

LLMeBench: A Flexible Framework for... 

TopK+ConE demonstration selection algorithm 

Revisiting Demonstration Selection Strategies ... 54 hidden contributions 29 hidden contributions 15 hidden contributions 40 hidden contributions 

Theoretical explanation linking the Reversal Curse to directed key ‑value memory and meta ‑learning... 

The Reversal Curse: LLMs trained on "A is B" f... 

SimpleQA benchmark dataset for short-form factuality 

Measuring short-form factuality in large... 538 hidden contributions 

EXPERTQA: Multi ‑domain expert ‑curated long ‑form QA dataset with claim ‑level attributions and fine ‑grained judgments 

EXPERTQA : Expert-Curated Questi... 

Chain-of-Verification (CoVe) self ‑correction pipeline 

Chain-of-Verification Reduces Hallucination... 

Verification questions yield higher factual accuracy than original long ‑form answers 

Chain-of-Verification Reduces Hallucination... 

Token-level uncertainty-based fact-checking pipeline for white-box LLMs 

Fact-Checking the Output of Large Language Mod... 36 hidden contributions 25 hidden contributions 

LongMemEval benchmark for long-term memory in chat assistants 

LongMemEval: Benchmarking Chat... 12 hidden contributions 366 hidden contributions 

Ite self ‑

fram hallu mi 

Towar Hallucin 

Real ‑Time Hallucination Detection with Minimal Overhead 

Unsupervised Real-Time Hallucination Detecti... 26 hidden contributions 26 hidden contributions 27 hidden contributions 13 hidden contributions 262 hidden contributions 

Standardized protocol for measuring ICL sensitivity via prompt perturbations 

On the Relation between Sensitivity and Accur... 

SUPER-NATURALINSTRUCTIONS meta-dataset 

SUPER-NATURALINSTRUCTIONS: Generalization via... 

Systematic evaluation protocol for cross-task instruction generalization 

SUPER-NATURALINSTRUCTIONS: Generalization via... 

Problem formulation of instruction-level backdoor attacks 

Instructions as Backdoors: Backdoor... 

Taxonomy of instruction-based backdoor attack variants 

Instructions as Backdoors: Backdoor... 491 hidden contributions 42 hidden contributions 43 h contr 

COOPERATE: Cooperative multi ‑LLM abstention algorithm 

Don't Hallucinate, Abstain: Identifying ... 18 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 21 hidden contributions 39 hidden contributions 46 hidden contributions 13 hidden contributions 121 hidden contributions 

EasyEdit: Unified extensible knowledge-editing framework for large language models 

Abstract 

Cross ‑lingual knowledge editing task definition and evaluation protocol 

Cross-Lingual Knowledge Editing in Large... 

F-Learning (Forgetting-before-Learning) paradigm for knowledge updating in LLMs 

Forgetting before Learning: Utilizing... 

Comprehensive empirical assessment of model ‑editing side effects on LLM general abilities 

Model Editing Harms General Abilities of... 111 hidden contributions 60 hidden contributions 67 hidden contributions 46 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 21 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 74 hidden contributions 14 hidden contributions 99 hidden contributions 76 hidden contributions 22 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 16 hidden contributions 102 hidden contributions 

SymbCoT conceptual framework for symbolic chain ‑of ‑thought reasoning 

Faithful Logical Reasoning via Symboli... 

Four ‑module LLM ‑only Symbolic Chain ‑of ‑Thought pipeline 

Faithful Logical Reasoning via Symboli... 9 hidden ntributions 32 hidden contributions dden utions sden tions 12 hidden contributions 26 hidden contributions 14 hidden contributions 

level roves QA 

under 

get ts 

al: What larity... 

K: Sampling ‑Based Knowledge Categorization Framework 

s Fine-Tuning LLMs on Knowledge Encoura... 

Controlled Closed ‑Book QA Fine ‑Tuning Protocol for Evaluating New Knowledge Integration 

Does Fine-Tuning LLMs on New Knowledge Encoura... 

Out-of-Distribution Generalization of Fine ‑Tuning Trade ‑off 

Does Fine-Tuning LLMs on New Knowledge Encoura... 20 hidden contributions 37 hidden contributions 31 hidden contributions 

Training ‑free token ‑level attribution via LLM hidden states 

Peering into the Mind of Language Models: An... 20 hidden contributions 

LLM Prompting for Informative Query Rewriting via Instruction Design 

Enhancing Conversational Search: Large Languag... 43 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 16 hidden contributions 144 hidden contributions 43 hidden contributions 51 hidden contributions 26 hidden contributions 42 hidden contributions 

Public Release of MUBASE Dataset, Annotation Guidelines, and Experimental Code 

Zero- and Few-Shot Prompting with LLMs: ... 17 hidden contributions 35 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 30 hidden contributions 99 hidden contributions 17 hidd contribu 39 hidden contributions 19 hid contrib 406 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source R INSTRUCTO Checkpo Training/Eva Code, and MED 

One Embedder, Instruction-Fin 

19 hi contrib 43 hidden contributions 32 hidden contributions 21 hidden contributions 105 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source release of cross ‑lingual knowledge ‑editing resources (code and Bi ‑ZsRE dataset) 

Cross-Lingual Knowledge Editing in Large... 25 hidden contributions 19 hidden contributions 13 hidden contributions 28 hidden contributions 29 hidden contributions 17 hidden contributions 18 hidden contributions 13 hidden contributions 12 hidden contributions 12 hidden contributions 15 hidden contributions Figure 3: A simplified impact assessment for the “Retrieval Augmented Genration (RAG) Framework” contribution from (Lewis et al., 2020). Here, nodes represent contributions, while edges represent precursor relations in the opposite direction –i.e. that the displayed technologies were build upon the root node. All content has been simplified for space: nodes show only contribution names and source paper titles, and not detailed contribution descriptions or metadata; edges do not show precursor descriptions or explanations, and cross-edges between nodes other than the root have been pruned to form a tree for visualization purposes. Similarly, only the highest linked contributions are shown, while total numbers of hidden contributions are shown in the square nodes. 

13 SELF ‑INSTRUCT bootstrapping framework for instruction data generation 

SELF-INSTRUCT: Aligning Language Models with... 902 hidden contributions 

LLM ‑generated multilingual commonsense reasoning datasets 

LLM-powered Data Augmentation for... 

Italian instruction ‑tuning dataset derived from Stanford Alpaca 

Camoscio: an Italian Instruction-tuned LLaMA 

Data ‑poisoning pipeline for implanting VPI backdoors 

Backdooring Instruction-Tuned Lar... 

Multilingual translation of ARC, HellaSwag, and MMLU into 26 languages 

Okapi: Instruction-tuned Large Language Models... 

Downsampled multilingual instruction tuning yields robust, cost ‑effective performance 

Monolingual or Multilingual Instruct... 

SELF-DEFENCE framework for automatic multilingual safety data generation 

Multilingual Jailbreak Challenges in Large... 

AgentTuning: Generalized Agent Ability Enhancement Method 

AgentTuning: Enabling Generalized Agent... 

AgentInstruct: High ‑Quality Interaction ‑Trajectory Dataset 

AgentTuning: Enabling Generalized Agent... 

Self ‑Rewarding Language Model (SRLM) framework 

Self-Rewarding Language Models 

RTVLM Red ‑Teaming Dataset and Benchmark for Vision ‑Language Models 

Red Teaming Visual Language Models 

Systematic zero-shot prompting evaluation of multilingual LLMs for South-East Asian code-mixing 

Prompting Multilingual Large Language Models... 

Zero ‑shot prompt template suite for code ‑mixed sentence generation 

Prompting Multilingual Large Language Models... 14 hidden contributions 

Position that monolingual instruction ‑tuning is insufficient for non ‑English abilities and that semantic... 

Empowering Cross-lingual Abilities of... 

Quantitative measurement of accuracy gaps between English ‑tuned and monolingual instruction ‑tuned L... 

Does the English Matter? Elicit Cross-lingual... 14 hidden contributions 

Multi ‑turn backdoor threat model for chat LLMs 

Exploring Backdoor Vulnerabilities of Ch... 

Distributed Triggers ‑based Backdoor (DTB) attack framework for chat models 

Exploring Backdoor Vulnerabilities of Ch... 

Empirical evaluation of Distributed Triggers ‑based Backdoor (DTB) on multiple chat models 

Exploring Backdoor Vulnerabilities of Ch... 

Empirical evaluation of distributed ‑trigger backdoor on instruction ‑tuned LLMs 

Exploring Backdoor Vulnerabilities of Ch... 

Empirical comparison of Distributed ‑Triggers Backdoor (DTB) versus single ‑scenario VPI baseline showing... 

Exploring Backdoor Vulnerabilities of Ch... 27 hidden contributions 

Cross ‑lingual generalization of fine ‑tuning attacks on multilingual LLMs 

Towards Understanding the Fragility of... 12 hidden contributions 

Ablation study separating language diversity from instruction diversity in multilingual instruction tuning 

Turning English-centric LLMs Into Polyglots: ... 

Open ‑source implementation and reproducibility package for Bergeron 

Bergeron: Combating Adversarial Attacks... 27 hidden contributions 

Iterative step-level Process Refinement (IPR) framework 

Watch Every Step! LLM Agent Learning via... 18 hidden contributions 

Open ‑source release of Agent ‑FLAN code, models, and dataset 

Agent-FLAN: Designing Data and Methods of... 93 hidden contributions 

Self ‑rewarding pipeline amplifies self ‑bias with larger candidate pools 

Pride and Prejudice: LLM Amplifies Self-Bias i... 

Scalable synthetic multilingual preference data generation pipeline 

RLHF Can Speak Many Languages: Unlocking... 

Meta-Rewarding framework for self-improving LLMs 

Meta-Rewarding Language Models: *Self-Improvi... 

Empirical Analysis of Tail Narrowing in LLM Self ‑Improvement 

Mitigating Tail Narrowing in LLM... 5 hidden contributions 

MLLMU ‑Bench: multimodal large language model unlearning benchmark 

Protecting Privacy in Multimodal Large... 10 hidden contributions 

Fine ‑tuned Smaller Multilingual Models Outperform Large Prompt ‑only LLMs on Code ‑Switching Tasks 

Multilingual Large Language Models Are N... 6 hidden contributions 

Position Statement: Current Multilingual LLMs Lack True Code ‑Switching Ability 

Multilingual Large Language Models Are N... 5 hidden contributions 3 hidden contributions 5 hidden contributions CLEANGEN inference-time decoding strategy for backdoor mitigation 

CLEANGEN: Mitigating Backdoor Attacks for... 5 hidden contributions 3 hidden contributions 4 hidden contributions 4 hidden contributions 3 hidden contributio 9 hidden contributions 4 hidden contributions 

Comprehensive empirical evaluation of jailbreak attacks and defenses on three LLMs 

A Comprehensive Study of Jailbreak Attack vers... 7 hidden contributions 3 hidden contributions 

Systematic bias of LLM judges toward model ‑generated text 

LLMs instead of Human Judges? A Large Scale... 4 hidden contributions 7 hidden contributions 6 hidden contributions 12 hidden contributions 1 hidden tributions 8 hidden contributions 7 hidden contributions 6 hidden contributions 12 hidden contributions Figure 4: A simplified impact assessment for the “SELF -I NSTRUCT bootstrapping framework for instruction data generation” contribution from (Wang et al., 2023). Here, nodes represent contributions, while edges represent precursor relations in the opposite direction – i.e. that the displayed technologies were build upon the root node. All content has been simplified for space: nodes show only contribution names and source paper titles, and not detailed contribution descriptions or metadata; edges do not show precursor descriptions or explanations, and cross-edges between nodes other than the root have been pruned to form a tree for visualization purposes. Similarly, only the highest linked contributions are shown, while total numbers of hidden contributions are shown in the square nodes. 

14