MECHBENCH: CAN AI SCIENTIFIC AGENTS DISCOVER
MECHANISMS BEYOND PHENOMENAL LAWS?
Zihan Yu1∗, Jiadong Zhang2,3∗, Jialin Cheng4∗, Jingtao Ding5†, Yong Li1†
1Department of Electronic Engineering, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3Beijing Zhongguancun Academy, Beijing, China
4Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
5Department of Earth System Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
yuzh23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {dingjingtao, liyong07}@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Scientific discovery requires not only recovering mathematical laws that describe observable behavior,
but also identifying the mechanisms that generate them. Existing benchmarks for symbolic regression
and scientific agents primarily evaluate phenomenal-law recovery, leaving mechanism discovery
largely untested. We introduce MECHBENCH, a benchmark that explicitly separates these two
capabilities. Each task is defined by a mechanistic model, a structured set of scientifically meaningful
relations whose joint consequences entail an observable phenomenal law, while agents receive only
observational data and scientific context. We evaluate mechanism recovery through mechanism
probes, which query internal scientific consequences that cannot be inferred from the phenomenal
law alone. To reduce reliance on memorized textbook mechanisms, we construct unfamiliar variants
through controlled, scientifically interpretable mutations of canonical mechanisms, and screen for
mechanistic indistinguishability to exclude ambiguous instances admitting comparable competing
mechanisms. Experiments across representative scientific agents reveal a substantial phenomenal–
mechanism recovery gap: for Codex with GPT-5.6-sol, phenomenal-law accuracy reaches 35.00%
on the Core-set while mechanism accuracy is only 13.75%, with mechanism recovery failing in
64.29% of cases where the phenomenal law is correctly recovered. The gap widens as mechanisms
become increasingly mutated, and even providing the correct phenomenal law leaves mechanism
recovery below 50%. These results reveal a substantial generalization gap in mechanistic reasoning
and establish mechanism discovery as a distinct challenge beyond recovering observable scientific
laws.
1
Introduction
Discovering compact mathematical laws from observations has long been a central objective of science and, more
recently, of automated scientific discovery. Yet recovering a law that describes observable behavior is not the same
as recovering the mechanism that produces it. In the philosophy of science, phenomenal models characterize the
observable inputs, modulators, and outputs of a system while leaving its relevant internal causal structure unspecified,
whereas mechanistic models further describe the components, relations, and organization responsible for generating the
phenomenon Machamer et al. (2000); Kaplan & Craver (2011); Craver & Kaplan (2020). The distinction is exemplified
by the transition from Kepler’s empirical laws of planetary motion to Newtonian mechanics: the former compactly
characterize regularities among observable quantities, while the latter provides an underlying structure from which those
regularities can be derived. Mechanistic models therefore make commitments beyond observational adequacy: they
seek to explain how a phenomenon is generated and imply properties of scientifically meaningful internal quantities
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
arXiv:2609.35515v1  [cs.AI]  28 Sep 2026


that are not specified by the observable law itself. Assessing whether AI systems can recover such mechanisms is thus a
distinct and stronger test of scientific discovery than accurate equation recovery.
Large language models and scientific agents have recently shown rapidly improving capabilities for discovering
mathematical regularities from data, progressing from LLM-guided symbolic regression to autonomous systems that
analyze observations, conduct experiments, invoke scientific tools, and iteratively refine hypotheses Shojaee et al.
(2025a); Xia et al. (2026); Yang et al. (2026). Accordingly, recent benchmarks have substantially strengthened the
evaluation of scientific law discovery: they introduce unfamiliar or counterfactual laws to reduce memorization, allow
agents to actively interrogate simulated systems, and increasingly ground discovery in realistic scientific contexts and
data Shojaee et al. (2025b); Zheng et al. (2026); Cerrato et al. (2026); Huang et al. (2026). Despite these advances,
their principal target remains the recovery of mathematical relations that reproduce observable system behavior. Such
evaluations establish whether an agent can discover an observationally adequate law, but do not require it to reconstruct
any internal mechanism from which that law follows. A recent work argues that a central missing capability in
current LLMs is the abductive “jump” from observations to explanatory premises, distinguishing it from induction
over observed patterns and deduction from given premises Zahavy (2026). This perspective highlights a capability that
existing law-discovery benchmarks do not directly test: whether AI systems can infer explanatory internal structure
beyond observable regularities.
Extending evaluation from law discovery to mechanism discovery is nontrivial. A benchmark must specify mechanistic
structure in a form that can be evaluated objectively, distinguish genuine reconstruction from recall of familiar textbook
mechanisms, and account for mechanistic indistinguishability, where distinct scientifically plausible mechanisms entail
the same observable law. These challenges make it difficult to determine, under controlled conditions, whether the
growing law-discovery capability of scientific agents extends to recovering underlying mechanisms.
To address these challenges, we introduce MECHBENCH, a benchmark that explicitly separates the recovery of
observable laws from the recovery of the mechanisms that generate them, as illustrated in Figure 1. We represent a
mechanism as a structured set of scientifically meaningful relations whose joint consequences entail an observable
phenomenal law, allowing an agent to be evaluated not only on whether its proposed mechanism reproduces the
observed input–output relationship, but also on whether it makes the correct additional commitments about internal
scientific quantities. We operationalize the latter through mechanism probes, which query scientifically defined internal
consequences that follow from the submitted mechanism but cannot be inferred from the phenomenal law and provided
scientific context alone. To distinguish reconstruction from memorization, we construct unfamiliar mechanism variants
through controlled, scientifically interpretable mutations of canonical mechanisms. Finally, we explicitly screen for
mechanistic indistinguishability and revise or exclude instances admitting readily constructible competing mechanisms
with the same phenomenal law. Together, these components turn mechanism discovery from an informal notion of
“deeper understanding” into a controlled and objectively testable discovery task.
Experiments across representative scientific agents reveal a substantial gap between phenomenal-law and mechanism
recovery. Taking Codex with GPT-5.6-sol as an example, phenomenal-law accuracy reaches 35.00% on the Core-set
while mechanism accuracy is only 13.75%, and mechanism recovery still fails in 64.29% of cases where the phenomenal
law is recovered correctly. This separation grows as mechanisms depart further from their canonical forms: phenomenal-
law and mechanism recovery decline together with increasing mutation count, but mechanism recovery deteriorates
more sharply. Moreover, even when the correct phenomenal law is directly provided, mechanism accuracy remains
below 50% and drops rapidly on increasingly mutated mechanisms. These results expose a substantial generalization
gap in mechanistic reasoning and suggest that mechanism discovery constitutes an additional, qualitatively more
difficult challenge beyond observable-law recovery.
2
Related Work
LLMs for Scientific Equation Discovery. Recent LLM-based symbolic-regression and scientific-agent systems
increasingly combine scientific prior knowledge with program synthesis, data analysis, tool use, and iterative hypothesis
refinement. LLM-SR integrates language-model proposals with evolutionary search Shojaee et al. (2025a); SR-Scientist
equips agents with data-analysis and equation-evaluation tools for iterative discovery Xia et al. (2026); and systems
such as KeplerAgent and A-SR further incorporate structural reasoning, tool orchestration, and longer agentic search
trajectories Yang et al. (2026); Zhao et al. (2026). These approaches substantially extend symbolic regression beyond
blind expression search, but their primary target remains the recovery of mathematical relations that characterize
observable system behavior. Our setting instead evaluates whether an agent can recover the scientific internal relations
from which those observable relations follow.
Benchmarks for Scientific Law Discovery. Classical symbolic-regression benchmarks, including the Feynman dataset
and SRBench, evaluate the recovery of compact equations from predefined observations Udrescu & Tegmark (2020);
2


𝐷𝐷=
𝐱𝐱𝑖𝑖, 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖
𝑖𝑖=1
𝑁𝑁
𝒫𝒫: 𝐹𝐹𝒫𝒫𝐱𝐱, 𝑦𝑦= 0
ℳ⇒𝒫𝒫
𝑎𝑎
𝑇𝑇
𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚
𝑀𝑀
𝑇𝑇
(Kepler’s Law)
𝑇𝑇2 = 4𝜋𝜋2𝑟𝑟3
𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺
𝑀𝑀
𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚
𝐹𝐹
𝐹𝐹
(Newton Mechanism)
𝐹𝐹= 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺
𝑟𝑟2
𝑟𝑟
𝑇𝑇
Scientific
Context
𝑀𝑀
𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚
𝐹𝐹𝑔𝑔
𝑣𝑣
𝐹𝐹𝑐𝑐
𝑇𝑇
𝑚𝑚1: 𝐹𝐹𝑔𝑔= 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺/𝑟𝑟2
𝑚𝑚2: 𝐹𝐹𝑐𝑐= 𝐹𝐹𝑔𝑔
𝑚𝑚3: 𝐹𝐹𝑐𝑐= 𝑚𝑚𝑣𝑣2/𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚4: 𝑇𝑇= 2𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋/𝑣𝑣
ℳ
𝑀𝑀
𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚
𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔
𝑣𝑣
𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑐
𝑇𝑇
𝑚𝑚2
′ : 𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑐= 𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔
𝑚𝑚3
′ : 𝑎𝑎𝑐𝑐= 𝑣𝑣2/𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚4
′ : 𝑇𝑇= 2𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋/𝑣𝑣
ℳ′
𝑚𝑚1
′ : 𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔= 𝐺𝐺𝐺𝐺/𝑟𝑟2
𝑀𝑀
𝑟𝑟
𝑚𝑚
𝜉𝜉
ℓ
𝜂𝜂
𝑇𝑇
𝑚𝑚2
′′: 𝜂𝜂= 4𝜋𝜋2𝜉𝜉
𝑚𝑚3
′′: ℓ= 𝜂𝜂/𝑀𝑀
𝑚𝑚4
′′: 𝑇𝑇= ℓ/𝐺𝐺
ℳ′′
𝑚𝑚1
′′: 𝜉𝜉= 𝑟𝑟3
Mechanistic Probe:
What is the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration experienced by the planet?
𝐹𝐹𝑐𝑐/𝑚𝑚
not sure …
𝑎𝑎c
Competitive mechanisms
d𝑁𝑁
d𝑡𝑡= 𝑏𝑏0 −𝑑𝑑0 𝑁𝑁(1 −
𝛼𝛼𝛼𝛼
𝑏𝑏0 −𝑑𝑑0
)
Same phenomenal law
Mechanistic Probe:
What is the birth rate at population size 𝑁𝑁∗?
𝑏𝑏0 −𝛼𝛼𝑁𝑁∗
𝑏𝑏0
Non-identifiable !
Mechanism Probe
𝑚𝑚1
′ : 𝒃𝒃= 𝒃𝒃𝟎𝟎−𝜶𝜶𝜶𝜶
(Density lowers birth)
𝑚𝑚𝟐𝟐: 𝑑𝑑= 𝑑𝑑0
𝑚𝑚𝟑𝟑: d𝑁𝑁
d𝑡𝑡= 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏−𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
Mechanism 2
(Density raises death)
𝑚𝑚1: 𝑏𝑏= 𝑏𝑏0
𝒎𝒎𝟐𝟐
′ : 𝒅𝒅= 𝒅𝒅𝟎𝟎+ 𝜶𝜶𝜶𝜶
𝑚𝑚𝟑𝟑: d𝑁𝑁
d𝑡𝑡= 𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏−𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑
Mechanism 1
Phenomenal model
Observations
Mechanistic model
Figure 1: From phenomenal-law recovery to mechanistic discovery.
La Cava et al. (2021); Matsubara et al. (2022). More recent benchmarks strengthen this setting for LLM-based scientific
discovery: LLM-SRBench uses transformed and synthetic equations to reduce direct memorization Shojaee et al.
(2025b); NewtonBench places altered physical laws in interactive simulated systems Zheng et al. (2026); Science-Gym
evaluates autonomous experimentation and data collection Cerrato et al. (2026); and SciLaws-Bench combines real
scientific observations with controlled, actively queryable scientific worlds Huang et al. (2026). Together, these
benchmarks increase unfamiliarity, interactivity, and scientific grounding, while their primary object of evaluation
remains the recovered observable law. MechBench instead targets mechanism discovery: it evaluates whether agents
can recover structured mechanistic models whose internal scientific consequences agree with those of the reference
mechanism, using controlled variants, mechanism probes, and screening for mechanistic indistinguishability.
3
From Phenomenal Laws to Mechanistic Discovery
3.1
Formalizing Mechanistic Discovery
Let x denote a set of observable input variables and y the target variable. A phenomenal law P of the form FP(x, y) = 0
represents their observable relationship. A mechanism M = {m1, . . . , mJ}, on the other hand, consists of a collection
of scientifically meaningful relations involving the observable variables and internal quantities h, where h denotes
quantities that cannot be directly observed. By eliminating h from M, we can derive the phenomenal law P:
M(x, y, h) =⇒P(x, y).
(1)
The additional internal structure encoded by M allows a mechanistic model to determine scientifically meaningful
quantities that cannot be inferred from P alone. For example, the phenomenal relation for Kepler’s third law can be
written as T 2 = 4π2r3/(GM). A Newtonian mechanism instead specifies gravity, orbital acceleration, force balance,
and velocity–period coupling.
In this work, we formulate mechanistic discovery as the task of reconstructing a mechanistic model from observational
data and scientific context. A reference mechanism M induces a phenomenal law P, from which observations
3


D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 can be sampled. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the agent receives D and scientific context C
that specifies the descriptions of observable variables and other background information, and is asked to reconstruct
the underlying mechanistic model without access to the reference mechanism or its internal quantities. Mechanistic
discovery is therefore formulated as
(C, D) −→ˆ
M.
(2)
3.2
Mechanism Probes
The same mechanism may be represented in different but scientifically equivalent ways. For example, as illustrated
in Figure 1, one formulation may explicitly reason through force, whereas another may eliminate force and express
the same physical relations in terms of acceleration. Mechanism recovery therefore cannot be assessed through literal
agreement with the equations used to represent the reference mechanism, as exact matching of equations, intermediate
symbols, or dependency graphs would conflate representational and mechanistic differences. On the other hand,
evaluating a submitted mechanism only by eliminating its internal quantities and comparing the resulting phenomenal
law with the reference P is also insufficient, because scientifically distinct mechanisms may entail the same phenomenal
law.
Inspired by the mechanistic view that explaining a phenomenon requires specifying scientifically meaningful internal
relations that generate the observable regularity and support correct reasoning about internal quantities that are not
determined by the phenomenal law itself, we introduce mechanism probes to assess these additional mechanistic
commitments. Specifically, we select a set Z = {zk}K
k=1 of scientifically defined quantities such that, for a generic
probe z ∈Z,
M ⇒z = gM(x),
P, C̸ ⇒z = gM(x).
(3)
The first condition requires each probe to capture an internal consequence of the reference mechanism, while the second
ensures that it cannot be inferred from the phenomenal law and the provided scientific context alone. A properly chosen
probe can then be used to assess whether ˆ
M reproduces the scientifically equivalent mechanistic commitments. Given
its submitted mechanism, the agent is asked to derive
ˆ
M ⇒z = g ˆ
M(x),
(4)
which can then be compared with the reference probe relation z = gM(x) symbolically and numerically. Because
each probe is defined by the scientific meaning of the queried quantity rather than by a particular intermediate symbol,
equivalent formulations of the same mechanism should imply the same probe value even when their derivations differ.
In practice, we restrict probes to quantities with clear scientific interpretations and explicit, objectively checkable
expressions from the variables available in the task; Appendix A.4 details their construction.
3.3
Mechanistic Indistinguishability
Since eliminating the internal quantities h from M yields the phenomenal law P, M can be viewed algebraically
as a decomposition of P. However, not every mathematically valid decomposition constitutes a mechanistic model.
The provided scientific context C strongly constrains which entities, relations, and assumptions provide a meaningful
explanation of the phenomenon. This constraint makes mechanism discovery well posed despite the mathematical
underdetermination.
However, the problem becomes ambiguous when there exists a competing mechanism M′ that is substantively different
from the reference mechanism M but entails the same phenomenal law and remains comparably admissible under
the provided scientific context C. As illustrated in Figure 1, the same population-level law may arise either from
density-dependent suppression of birth or from density-dependent enhancement of death, while the two mechanisms
make different predictions about the underlying birth rate. Such cases are a mechanism-level form of empirical
equivalence and underdetermination by evidence Hoefer & Rosenberg (1994), which can be referred to as mechanistic
indistinguishability. In this case, the observable evidence together with the provided scientific context offers no
sufficient basis for singling out M over M′, making recovery of the designated reference mechanism intrinsically
ambiguous. Avoiding such ambiguity is also necessary for interpreting the mechanism probes introduced in Section 3.2.
A mechanism probe tests whether a proposed mechanism ˆ
M reproduces the same scientifically meaningful internal
consequences as the reference mechanism M, but does not determine which of two competing mechanisms is
scientifically more plausible. Probe-based agreement or disagreement therefore provides a valid operational criterion for
mechanism recovery only when no substantively different mechanism that is comparably admissible under C remains
compatible with the same phenomenal evidence. We therefore require benchmark instances to avoid such competing
mechanisms; the corresponding screening procedure is described in Section 4.2.
4


ℳ
y
x
𝒫𝒫: 𝐹𝐹𝒫𝒫𝐱𝐱, 𝑦𝑦= 0
𝑧𝑧= 𝑔𝑔ℳ𝑥𝑥
(a) Problem construction
(b) Benchmark instance construction
(c) Mechanistic indistinguishability
(d) Evaluation protocol
ℳ0
≠
𝒫𝒫
Intended
Mutation Δ𝑠𝑠
ℳ𝑠𝑠
𝑚𝑚1, … , 𝑚𝑚𝑗𝑗, … , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
𝑚𝑚1, … , 𝜹𝜹𝒎𝒎𝒋𝒋,… , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
Alternative
Modification ෩Δ𝑠𝑠,𝑖𝑖
෩
ℳ𝑠𝑠,𝑖𝑖
𝑚𝑚1, … , 𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖, … , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
𝑚𝑚1, … , ෩𝜹𝜹𝒎𝒎𝒊𝒊,… , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
Canonical mechanism
Relation modifications
Competing mechanisms
Same phenomenal law
Eliminate Internal Variables 𝐡𝐡
Sample
Mechanism
Phenomenal model
Probes
𝐷𝐷
𝐷𝐷ID
test
𝐷𝐷OOD
test
Observations
Held-out tests
෡
ℳ
Submitted Mechanism
Phenomenal law
identification
෡
ℳ⇒෠𝒫𝒫
෠𝒫𝒫vs 𝒫𝒫
Δ4
Δ3
Δ2
Δ1
ℳ0
ℳ4
ℳ3,4
ℳ2,3,4
ℳ1,2,3,4
Familiar
Unfamiliar
Physics Chemistry Biology
Material
𝑚𝑚1, … , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
𝑚𝑚1
′ , … , 𝑚𝑚𝐽𝐽
′
Mechanistic model
identification
𝑔𝑔෡
ℳ
𝑘𝑘vs 𝑔𝑔ℳ
𝑘𝑘
෡
ℳ⇒𝑧𝑧𝑘𝑘= 𝑔𝑔෡
ℳ
𝑘𝑘𝑥𝑥
Figure 2: Construction and evaluation of MechBench. (a) Canonical mechanisms are modified and composed to
create unfamiliar variants. (b) Each mechanism induces a phenomenal law used to generate observations and held-out
ID/OOD tests. (c) Candidate competing mechanisms are screened for mechanistic indistinguishability. (d) Submitted
mechanisms are evaluated by both phenomenal-law recovery and mechanism probes.
4
Benchmark Construction
4.1
Constructing Mechanism Variants
Scientific-discovery benchmarks such as AI Feynman and LLM-SRBench often construct tasks from established
scientific laws and equations Udrescu & Tegmark (2020); Shojaee et al. (2025b). For LLM-based agents, however,
canonical scientific knowledge may already be present in pretraining data, making successful recovery difficult to
distinguish from memorization Shojaee et al. (2025b). To balance scientific grounding with mechanism unfamiliarity,
we select canonical scientific mechanisms from physics, chemistry, biology, and materials science and use them as
blueprints for constructing unfamiliar mechanism variants (Appendix A.1).
Specifically, a mutation ∆s applies a scientifically interpretable modification to the canonical mechanism,
M(s) = ∆s

M(0)
.
(5)
A useful mutation should depart sufficiently from the canonical mechanism to prevent straightforward reproduction of
its textbook derivation, while remaining scientifically admissible under the relevant domain knowledge. We therefore
favor local modifications with clear scientific semantics over arbitrary symbolic perturbations. Representative mutations
include changing an interaction scaling law, introducing a source or leakage term into a balance relation, replacing a
linear constitutive response with a nonlinear one, or modifying a geometric constraint; additional examples and details
are provided in Appendix A.3.
Compatible mutations can further be composed to construct variants that depart more substantially from the canonical
mechanism and are less amenable to direct textbook recall. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), given a set of compatible
mutations {∆s1, . . . , ∆sq}, we construct
M(s1,...,sq) = (∆sq ◦· · · ◦∆s1)

M(0)
.
(6)
The five mutations in each family are selected and, where needed, adjusted to remain compatible under composition.
The resulting task family retains a shared scientific scaffold while varying which and how many elements of the
canonical mechanism are modified, from the original through all mutation subsets.
4.2
Constructing Benchmark Instances
For each constructed mechanism M, we derive its corresponding phenomenal law P by eliminating the internal
quantities h and use this law to generate observable data. As illustrated in Figure 2(b), let X denote the scientifically
meaningful range of the observable inputs. We partition this range into two disjoint regions, XID and XOOD, corre-
sponding respectively to interpolation and extrapolation regimes. We sample observations D from XID to provide to the
agent, and we construct held-out test sets
Dtest
ID = {(xID
i , yID
i )}NID
i=1 ,
xID
i
∈XID,
Dtest
OOD = {(xOOD
i
, yOOD
i
)}NOOD
i=1
,
xOOD
i
∈XOOD,
(7)
to evaluate in-domain and out-of-domain numerical consistency of the recovered phenomenal law. Appendix A.5
describes the sampling ranges, public task view, and hidden evaluation data.
5


To avoid constructing mechanistically indistinguishable instances, we explicitly search for competing mechanisms
during instance construction. As illustrated in Figure 2(c), consider a canonical mechanism M(0) = {m1, . . . , mJ}
and a variant M(s) = ∆s(M(0)) in which the intended mutation replaces relation mj with δ(mj), so that M(s) =
{m1, . . . , δ(mj), . . . , mJ}. We derive candidate alternative modifications ˜δ(mi) of other relations mi (i̸ = j) that can
reproduce the same induced phenomenal law, creating
f
M(s,i) = {m1, . . . , ˜δ(mi), . . . , mJ}.
(8)
If such an alternative requires comparable or lower structural complexity and no greater departure from the relevant
scientific background knowledge than the intended modification δ(mj), this provides strong evidence that the resulting
task is mechanistically indistinguishable, and the corresponding variant is revised or excluded.
4.3
Benchmark Evaluation Protocol
As illustrated in Figure 2(d), for a submitted mechanism ˆ
M, our evaluation separates two complementary signals:
whether ˆ
M recovers the phenomenal law and whether it reproduces the additional mechanistic consequences encoded
by the mechanism probes. To evaluate phenomenal-law recovery, we first derive the phenomenal law implied by the
submission,
ˆ
M =⇒ˆP,
(9)
and compare ˆP with the reference P using symbolic and numerical equivalence. This determines whether the proposed
mechanism accounts for the observed phenomenal relationship.
To evaluate mechanism recovery, we freeze the submitted mechanism and present the scientific definition of each
mechanism probe zk to the agent independently, asking it to derive the relation between the defined quantity and the
observable variables based on its submitted ˆ
M,
ˆ
M =⇒zk = g(k)
ˆ
M (x).
(10)
The predicted relation g(k)
ˆ
M is compared with the reference relation g(k)
M using the same symbolic and numerical
equivalence machinery. Probes are queried independently so that information revealed by one probe cannot alter the
mechanism used to answer another.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental Setup
Benchmark and evaluated systems.
We evaluate on two MechBench subsets constructed in Section 4 and detailed
in Appendix A. The Full-set contains 512 instances from 16 task families spanning physics, chemistry, biology, and
materials science, while the Core-set is a fixed subset of 80 instances from eight families. We use the Core-set to
compare a broader range of model–agent configurations and the Full-set to evaluate performance across more task
families. We evaluate seven configurations spanning Codex, Claude Code, and DeepSeek Harness with GPT-5.6-sol,
GLM-5.3-flash, DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731, and DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813. All seven configurations are evaluated on the
Core-set, while Codex with GPT-5.6-sol and GLM-5.3-flash is additionally evaluated on the Full-set. We also include
PySR as a non-LLM equation-discovery baseline and PySR + Direct-Ask, where DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 answers
mechanism probes from the equation discovered by PySR.
Gold-P control.
To isolate mechanism reasoning from phenomenal-law discovery, we additionally evaluate Gold-P
Direct-Ask, where the reference phenomenal law P is provided directly and the model answers each mechanism probe
independently in a tool-free turn. We evaluate this control with GPT-5.6-sol, GLM-5.3-flash, and DeepSeek-v4-flash-
0731 on both the Core-set and Full-set.
Protocol and metrics.
In the standard discovery setting, agents receive only the scientific context C and training
observations D; the reference mechanism, mechanism probes, and held-out observations remain inaccessible during
search. We report phenomenal-law accuracy SA(P) and task-level mechanism accuracy SA(M), where a task is
counted as mechanistically correct only if all of its probes are symbolically correct. Detailed configurations, numerical
ID/OOD metrics, scoring rules, and repeated-run aggregation are provided in Appendix B.
6


Table 1: Symbolic recovery results on the Core-set and Full-set. SA(P) and SA(M) denote phenomenal-law and
mechanism recovery, respectively.
Base Model
Agent
Core-set (n=80)
Full-set (n=512)
SA(P)↑SA(M)↑1 −(M | P)
SA(P)↑SA(M)↑1 −(M | P)
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731 PySR+Direct-Ask 0.00%
1.25%
/
0.20%
0.20%
/
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
35.00% 13.75%
64.29%
16.02%
7.81%
57.32%
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex
6.25%
2.92%
67.22%
4.30%
1.76%
63.64%
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
8.75%
3.75%
57.14%
/
/
/
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731
Codex
7.92%
3.75%
49.07%
/
/
/
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731
Claude Code
6.25%
3.75%
60.00%
/
/
/
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731 Deepseek Harness 6.25%
2.50%
60.00%
/
/
/
Deepseek-v4-pro-0813 Deepseek Harness 10.00%
3.75%
62.50%
/
/
/
5.2
The Phenomenal–Mechanism Recovery Gap
Table 1 reports phenomenal-law and mechanism recovery in the standard discovery setting. Across all seven agent
configurations, mechanism accuracy is consistently lower than phenomenal-law accuracy, revealing a systematic gap
between recovering observable behavior and reconstructing the mechanism that generates it. Taking Codex with
GPT-5.6-sol as an example, SA(P) reaches 35.00% on the Core-set, whereas SA(M) is only 13.75%; on the Full-set,
the corresponding scores are 16.02% and 7.81%. The same pattern holds across the remaining configurations despite
their substantially lower overall recovery rates. (See Appendix C.2 for variant-only results.)
To separate mechanism failures from failures to recover the observable law, we additionally report the conditional
failure rate 1 −(M | P), which is the probability of failing mechanism recovery among instances with successful
phenomenal-law recovery (i.e., Pr(SM = 0 | SP = 1)). For Codex with GPT-5.6-sol, this rate is 64.29% on the
Core-set and 57.32% on the Full-set, suggesting that even when the phenomenal law is recovered correctly, mechanism
recovery fails in more than half of the cases. The other agent configurations exhibit the same pattern, with Core-set
conditional failure rates ranging from 49.07% to 67.22%. These results suggest that mechanism recovery is not simply
a stricter version of equation recovery: agents that successfully identify observable relations still frequently fail to
reconstruct the internal scientific structure that produces them.
Moreover, Figure 3 examines this rate as a function of mutation count for Codex with GPT-5.6-sol. Although
phenomenal-law and mechanism accuracy decline together as mutations accumulate, mechanism accuracy deteriorates
more sharply, causing the conditional mechanism failure rate to rise. Specifically, the rate is approximately 33% on
the Core-set and 17% on the Full-set for Original instances, and increases rapidly with additional mutations, reaching
100% at three mutations on the Core-set and four mutations on the Full-set. This widening separation suggests that
increasing mechanism unfamiliarity disproportionately impairs recovery of internal mechanistic structure relative to
recovery of the observable law, indicating that mechanism discovery poses an additional and qualitatively more difficult
challenge than phenomenal-law discovery.
5.3
Oracle Control: Knowing the Law Is Not Enough
We use Gold-P Direct-Ask to test whether models can reliably answer mechanism probes when the correct phenomenal
law is provided. According to Table 2, agents achieve higher mechanism accuracy under Gold-P Direct-Ask than under
standard discovery across both datasets for every model evaluated in both settings. For GPT-5.6-sol, accuracy reaches
45.00% on the Core-set and 49.02% on the Full-set, compared with 13.75% and 7.81%, respectively, under standard
discovery. Nevertheless, mechanism accuracy remains below 50% on both datasets, while the two flash models remain
substantially less successful. Thus, access to the correct observable relationship does not make mechanism recovery
reliable. This is partly because the phenomenal law itself does not encode the internal mechanistic information required
by the probes; on the other hand, it also reflects models’ limited ability to reconstruct such missing mechanistic structure
even when the observable law is given, underscoring the need for dedicated evaluation of mechanism discovery.
Figure 4 further shows that mechanism recovery under Gold-P deteriorates rapidly as mutation count increases. For
GPT-5.6-sol, mechanism accuracy is 87.50% on Original instances in both sets, but falls to 12.50% on the Core-set
and 22.50% on the Full-set with four mutations; the two flash models remain near zero across most multi-mutation
groups. The sharp degradation from Original to increasingly mutated mechanisms suggests a substantial generalization
7


Table 2: Mechanism recovery under standard discovery and Gold-P Direct-Ask on the Core-set and Full-set.
Base Model
Core-set (n=80) · SA(M)↑
Full-set (n=512) · SA(M)↑
Standard discovery Gold-P Direct-Ask
Standard discovery Gold-P Direct-Ask
GPT-5.6-sol
13.75%
45.00%
7.81%
49.02%
GLM-5.3-flash
2.92%
6.25%
1.76%
3.91%
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731
3.75%
10.00%
/
4.10%
Figure 3: Recovery accuracy and conditional mechanism
failure rate across mutation counts for Codex with GPT-
5.6-sol.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SA() / SA()
Core-set (n=80)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Full-set (n=512)
(NA)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
1 −(∣)
(NA)
Number of Mutations
SA()
SA()
1 −(∣)
Figure 4: Mechanism recovery by mutation count under
standard and Gold-P settings.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SA()
Core-set (n=80)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Full-set (n=512)
Number of Mutations
GPT-5.6-sol
GLM-5.3-flash
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731
GPT-5.6-sol
GLM-5.3-flash
Deepseek-v4-flash-0731
Gold-P Direct Ask
Standard Discovery
gap in mechanistic reasoning: strong performance on familiar scientific mechanisms does not readily transfer to novel
mechanistic structures, highlighting the value of controlled mutations for evaluating mechanism discovery.
5.4
Comparisons Across Models, Harnesses, and Task Families
We further compare recovery performance across base models, agent harnesses, and scientific task families. Table 3
reports domain-level Core-set recovery; Appendix C.1 provides Full-set and numerical results, Appendix C.3 provides
statistical comparisons, and Table 13 reports family-level results.
With Codex fixed, GPT-5.6-sol achieves substantially higher phenomenal-law and mechanism recovery than the two
flash models (Table 1), while no significant difference is detected between GLM-5.3-flash and DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731.
GPT-5.6-sol also achieves higher accuracy under Gold-P Direct-Ask (Table 2), which may reflect a stronger ability to
infer latent mechanistic structure from observable consequences and scientific context.
Table 3: Complete Core-set symbolic-recovery results by scientific domain. A dash denotes a metric that is not defined
for the corresponding control or baseline.
Base model
Agent / condition
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Materials
P
M
P
M
P
M
P
M
No LLM
PySR
0.00
–
0.00
–
0.00
–
0.00
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 PySR + Direct-Ask
–
5.00
–
0.00
–
0.00
–
0.00
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
40.00 20.00 40.00 25.00 40.00 10.00 20.00 0.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex (3-run avg.) 11.67 11.67 5.00
0.00
3.33
0.00
5.00 0.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
25.00 15.00 5.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Codex (3-run avg.) 15.00 10.00 8.33
5.00
3.33
0.00
5.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Claude Code
5.00 10.00 15.00 5.00
0.00
0.00
5.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 DeepSeek Harness 15.00 10.00 0.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
5.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813
DeepSeek Harness 10.00 5.00 15.00 10.00 5.00
0.00 10.00 0.00
8


In contrast, holding the base model fixed, we do not detect significant performance differences among the evaluated
agent harnesses. Similarly, no significant domain-level differences are detected among physics, chemistry, biology, and
materials science. However, individual task families exhibit substantially different phenomenal-law and mechanism
recovery profiles. For example, Inclined Rolling has relatively high phenomenal-law recovery but low mechanism
recovery, whereas Competitive Inhibition Pulse Reaction shows the opposite pattern. Overall, the observed variation
is more pronounced across base models and task families than across harnesses or scientific domains, indicating that
mechanism-recovery difficulty is highly heterogeneous across specific task families and is not well characterized by
broad domain labels alone.
6
Conclusion
We introduced MECHBENCH to evaluate mechanism discovery beyond phenomenal-law recovery. MechBench
combines controlled mechanism mutations, mechanism probes, and screening for mechanistic indistinguishability
to enable objective evaluation of internal scientific structure beyond observational agreement. Across representative
scientific agents, we observe a substantial gap between phenomenal-law and mechanism recovery, with the gap
widening as mechanisms depart further from their canonical forms. Even when the correct phenomenal law is provided,
mechanism recovery remains difficult, particularly on increasingly mutated mechanisms. Together, these results reveal
a substantial generalization gap in mechanistic reasoning and establish mechanism discovery as a distinct challenge
beyond recovering observable scientific laws.
A primary limitation of MechBench is that it currently focuses on mechanisms whose observable phenomenal laws can
be obtained through tractable symbolic elimination. Many scientific systems do not admit such a closed-form reduction:
deriving observable behavior from the underlying mechanism may require solving nonlinear or transcendental equations,
integrating differential equations, or performing numerical simulation. As a result, the current benchmark covers
only a subset of mechanistic discovery problems for which the mapping M →P can be expressed analytically. A
natural extension is to bypass explicit construction of P and generate observations directly from the mechanism through
simulation, M →D. Such a setting would substantially broaden the scope of mechanism discovery, but would
also require new methods for validating submitted mechanisms and evaluating mechanism probes under numerical
approximation, as well as revisiting mechanistic indistinguishability when equivalence can no longer be established
symbolically.
AI use statement
In this work, we used generative AI tools to assist with research ideation and hypothesis refinement, the development and
critique of benchmark methodology and experimental design, the construction and refinement of synthetic benchmark
instances, mechanism variants, and mechanism probes, and the implementation and debugging of research code. We
have not used generative AI for formulating or proving mathematical theorems or for translation; tasks involving
externally collected datasets or qualitative data analysis were not applicable to this work. Additionally, we used
generative AI tools for literature search and summarization, brainstorming, improving presentation and readability,
and suggesting paper structure and terminology. We have reviewed all AI-assisted work. Specifically, we checked
LLM-generated research ideas for potential plagiarism through a manual literature survey, and verified and tested
LLM-generated code for correctness. We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims, or
artifacts produced with the aid of generative AI.
Ethics statement
This work evaluates scientific reasoning in AI systems using controlled benchmark tasks and synthetically generated
observations derived from scientific mechanism models. It does not involve human subjects, personal or private data, or
decisions affecting individuals. We foresee no ethical concerns.
Reproducibility statement
We provide detailed documentation of benchmark construction and experimental evaluation throughout the paper and
appendices. Our code, task instances, and data are publicly available at https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/
MechBench.
9


References
JE Bauerle. Study of solid electrolyte polarization by a complex admittance method. Journal of Physics and Chemistry
of Solids, 30(12):2657–2670, 1969.
Lacramioara Bintu, Nicolas E Buchler, Hernan G Garcia, Ulrich Gerland, Terence Hwa, Jan´e Kondev, and Rob Phillips.
Transcriptional regulation by the numbers: models. Current opinion in genetics & development, 15(2):116–124,
2005.
Bruno A Boley, Jerome H Weiner, and Ellis H Dill. Theory of thermal stresses, 1961.
Mattia Cerrato, Lennart Baur, Jannis Brugger, Sajjad Shumaly, Nicholas Schmitt, Edward Finkelstein, Selina Jukic,
Lars M¨unzel, Felix Peter Paul, Pascal Pfannes, et al. Science-gym: A simple testbed for ai-driven scientific discovery.
Machine Learning, 115(1):16, 2026.
William G Cochran. The comparison of percentages in matched samples. Biometrika, 37(3/4):256–266, 1950.
Carl F Craver and David M Kaplan. Are more details better? on the norms of completeness for mechanistic explanations.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2020.
Manfred Eigen. Proton transfer, acid-base catalysis, and enzymatic hydrolysis. part i: elementary processes. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition in English, 3(1):1–19, 1964.
Joseph Fourier. Theorie analytique de la chaleur, par M. Fourier. Chez Firmin Didot, p`ere et fils, 1822.
David E Goldman. Potential, impedance, and rectification in membranes. The Journal of general physiology, 27(1):
37–60, 1943.
Herbert Goldstein. Classical mechanics. Pearson Education India, 2011.
Edwin H Hall. On a new action of the magnet on electric currents. American Journal of Mathematics, 2(3):287–292,
1879.
Carl Hoefer and Alexander Rosenberg. Empirical equivalence, underdetermination, and systems of the world. Philoso-
phy of science, 61(4):592–607, 1994.
Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statistics, pp. 65–70,
1979.
Yiming Huang, Ziche Liu, Zhuohang Wu, Yiqian Wang, Junxia Cui, Xinkai Zou, Linjun Mao, Nan Huang, Naicheng
Yu, Kaijie Zhu, et al. Can llms discover scientific laws in real and parallel worlds? arXiv preprint arXiv:2609.01552,
2026.
David Michael Kaplan and Carl F Craver. The explanatory force of dynamical and mathematical models in neuroscience:
A mechanistic perspective. Philosophy of science, 78(4):601–627, 2011.
William H Kruskal and W Allen Wallis. Use of ranks in one-criterion variance analysis. Journal of the American
statistical Association, 47(260):583–621, 1952.
William La Cava, Bogdan Burlacu, Marco Virgolin, Michael Kommenda, Patryk Orzechowski, Fabr´ıcio Olivetti
de Franc¸a, Ying Jin, and Jason H Moore. Contemporary symbolic regression methods and their relative performance.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 2021(DB1):1, 2021.
Irving Langmuir. The mechanism of the catalytic action of platinum in the reactions 2co+ o2= 2co2 and 2h2+ o2=
2h2o. Transactions of the Faraday Society, 17(0):621–654, 1922.
Frederick A Lindemann. The radiation theory of chemical action. In Selected Readings in Chemical Kinetics, pp.
93–96. Elsevier, 1967.
J Ross Macdonald. Impedance spectroscopy. Annals of biomedical engineering, 20(3):289–305, 1992.
Peter Machamer, Lindley Darden, and Carl F Craver. Thinking about mechanisms. Philosophy of science, 67(1):1–25,
2000.
Yoshitomo Matsubara, Naoya Chiba, Ryo Igarashi, and Yoshitaka Ushiku. Rethinking symbolic regression datasets and
benchmarks for scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10540, 2022.
Quinn McNemar.
Note on the sampling error of the difference between correlated proportions or percentages.
Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157, 1947.
Helmut Mehrer. Diffusion in solids: fundamentals, methods, materials, diffusion-controlled processes. Springer, 2007.
Jacque Monod, Jeffries Wyman, Jean-Pierre Changeux, et al. On the nature of allosteric transitions: a plausible model.
J mol biol, 12(1):88–118, 1965.
10


Jacques Monod. The growth of bacterial cultures. Selected Papers in Molecular Biology by Jacques Monod, 139(606),
2012.
Isaac Newton. Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, volume 1. G. Brookman, 1833.
Aaron Novick and Leo Szilard. Description of the chemostat. Science, 112(2920):715–716, 1950.
Irwin H Segel. Enzyme kinetics. Behavior and analysis of rapid equilibrium and steady-state enzyme systems, pp.
29–34, 1975.
Parshin Shojaee, Kazem Meidani, Shashank Gupta, Amir Barati Farimani, and Chandan Reddy. Llm-sr: Scien-
tific equation discovery via programming with large language models. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, volume 2025, pp. 16054–16085, 2025a.
Parshin Shojaee, Ngoc-Hieu Nguyen, Kazem Meidani, Amir Barati Farimani, Khoa D Doan, and Chandan K Reddy.
Llm-srbench: A new benchmark for scientific equation discovery with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.10415, 2025b.
George Gabriel Stokes. On the effect of the internal friction of fluids on the motion of pendulums. Trans. Camb. Phil.
Soc., 9:8, 1851.
Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. Ai feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic regression. Science
advances, 6(16):eaay2631, 2020.
Frank Wilcoxon. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics bulletin, 1(6):80–83, 1945.
Shijie Xia, Yuhan Sun, and Pengfei Liu. Sr-scientist: Scientific equation discovery with agentic ai. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pp. 75787–75811, 2026.
Jianke Yang, Ohm Venkatachalam, Mohammad Kianezhad, Sharvaree Vadgama, and Rose Yu. Think like a scientist:
Physics-guided llm agent for equation discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12259, 2026.
Tom Zahavy. Position: Llms can’t jump. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper
Track, 2026.
Wenxiao Zhao, Dong Liu, Kaiyi Xu, Feng Liu, Zhen Zhao, Fei Ben, Shu Wang, Wenhao Li, Yingnian Wu, Fenghua
Ling, et al. A-sr: Self-evolving agentic llms for symbolic regression via hierarchical coordination. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.04872, 2026.
Tianshi Zheng, Kiu Wai Tam, Kim Hue Nam Nguyen, Baixuan Xu, Zhaowei Wang, Cheng Jiayang, Hong Ting Tsang,
Weiqi Wang, Jiaxin Bai, Tianqing Fang, et al. Newtonbench: Benchmarking generalizable scientific law discovery in
llm agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pp. 99018–99088, 2026.
A
Task Construction Details
A.1
Task Families and Reference Mechanisms
MechBench contains 16 task families, with four families drawn from each of physics, chemistry, biology, and materials
science. Each family is organized around a standard scientific construction. To ensure that every internal quantity and
observable has an unambiguous value, we combine canonical relations with explicit regime assumptions and, where
needed, synthetic but scientifically interpretable closures. Table 4 summarizes the scientific blueprint of each Original
instance.
Physics.
The four Original mechanisms instantiate familiar physical models. Circular Orbit Newton (1833) uses
Newtonian inverse-square gravity and circular-motion balance to model the orbital period of a test body. Hall Response
Hall (1879) uses the classical carrier-transport tensor under an open transverse circuit, together with an offset contact
geometry, to model a measured Hall voltage. Inclined Rolling Goldstein (2011) uses the coupled translational and
rotational dynamics of a rigid body subject to a no-slip constraint. Terminal Settling Stokes (1851) uses the steady
gravity–buoyancy balance of a sphere in the low-Reynolds-number Stokes regime.
Chemistry.
The four Original mechanisms model transient chemical responses using state-population balances. Acid–
Base Buffer Relaxation Eigen (1964) uses proton exchange between the solution and buffer sites to model the pH response
to a pulse. Competitive Inhibition Pulse Reaction Segel (1975) uses transitions among free, substrate-bound, and
inhibitor-bound enzyme states to model product formation under competition. Lindemann Pulse Reaction Lindemann
(1967) uses collisional activation, deactivation, and product formation to model the response of a unimolecular reaction.
Surface Pair Catalysis Langmuir (1922) uses adsorption, desorption, paired surface-complex formation, and surface
reaction to model catalytic product formation.
11


Table 4: The 16 task families and the scientific constructions used for their Original reference mechanisms.
Domain
Task family
Description
Physics
Circular Orbit
Models the orbital period of a test body using Newtonian inverse-
square attraction, circular radial balance, and the speed–period
relation.
Hall Response
Models the voltage measured across offset contacts using a classical
carrier-conductivity tensor and an open transverse circuit.
Inclined Rolling
Models the downslope acceleration of a rigid body from coupled
translational and rotational balances under no-slip rolling.
Terminal Settling
Models the terminal speed of a sphere from gravity, buoyancy, and
linear Stokes drag at low Reynolds number.
Chemistry
Acid–Base Buffer Relax-
ation
Models transient pH response through acid–base buffer capacities
and coupled proton-exchange population balances.
Competitive
Inhibition
Pulse Reaction
Models product response through mass-action balances among free
enzyme, substrate-bound enzyme, and inhibitor-bound enzyme.
Lindemann Pulse Reac-
tion
Models product response with a collisionally activated Lindemann
scheme containing activation, deactivation, and product formation.
Surface Pair Catalysis
Models catalytic product response through adsorption, desorption,
paired surface-complex formation, and surface reaction.
Biology
Allosteric Regulation
Models catalytic activity using a two-conformation statistical occu-
pancy model with conformation-dependent turnover.
Gene Repression
Models transcription initiation through mutually exclusive promoter
occupancies and productive polymerase binding.
Membrane Channel Flux Models membrane current density by coupling channel-state occu-
pancy to constant-field electrodiffusive ion flux.
Population Resource Bal-
ance
Models stationary population density using chemostat resource
balances and saturating resource-limited growth.
Materials
Composite Heat Trans-
port
Models heat flux by one-dimensional Fourier transport through two
material layers in series.
Grain-Boundary Electri-
cal Response
Models effective conductivity through series grain-interior and
grain-boundary complex admittances in a brick-layer geometry.
Thermoelastic
Heating
Response
Models stress from preparation-dependent thermal relaxation, ther-
mal eigenstrain, and elastic bar–frame compatibility.
Vacancy Diffusion
Models diffusivity from equilibrium vacancy formation and ther-
mally activated jumps in a three-dimensional random walk.
Biology.
The four Original mechanisms represent distinct forms of biological regulation and transport. Allosteric
Regulation Monod et al. (1965) uses ligand occupancies across two protein conformations, with conformation-dependent
catalytic turnover, to model activity. Gene Repression Bintu et al. (2005) uses mutually exclusive promoter occupancies
for repressor and polymerase to model transcription initiation. Membrane Channel Flux Goldman (1943) couples closed
and open channel states to constant-field electrodiffusion to model ionic current density. Population Resource Balance
Monod (2012); Novick & Szilard (1950) uses steady chemostat balances and saturating resource-limited growth to
model population density.
Materials science.
The four Original mechanisms describe transport and coupled thermomechanical responses in
materials. Composite Heat Transport Fourier (1822) uses one-dimensional Fourier conduction through two layers in
series to model heat flux. Grain-Boundary Electrical Response Bauerle (1969); Macdonald (1992) uses grain-interior
and grain-boundary admittances in a brick-layer geometry to model effective conductivity. Thermoelastic Heating
Response Boley et al. (1961) combines preparation-dependent thermal relaxation, thermal eigenstrain, and bar–frame
compatibility to model stress. Vacancy Diffusion Mehrer (2007) combines equilibrium vacancy formation with thermally
activated atomic jumps in a three-dimensional random walk to model diffusivity.
12


Mutation type
Scientific interpretation
Representative changes in the benchmark
Constitutive
or
component
re-
sponse
Change how a component prop-
erty depends on its local state
or an observable control.
Mobile
carrier
trapping
in
Hall
Re-
sponse; temperature-difference-dependent
conductivity in Composite Heat Transport;
pressure-dependent migration barrier in Va-
cancy Diffusion.
Internal state or
storage
Add a scientifically meaning-
ful population, compartment,
reservoir, or relaxation mode.
Product-bound enzyme and surface-product
intermediates; inactive channel state; slow
thermal and anelastic reservoirs.
Additional
trans-
port
or
reaction
channel
Open a parallel pathway that
contributes a new flux while re-
taining the original pathway.
Finite-range orbital attraction, conductive
heat bypass, fast grain-boundary path, and
alternate vacancy-migration channel.
Source, sink, or
balance modifica-
tion
Add a force, production, loss,
or exchange term to a govern-
ing balance.
Resisting torque in rolling, external lift in
settling, direct Lindemann product forma-
tion, and feed-dependent mortality.
Geometric or kine-
matic constraint
Change how geometric quanti-
ties or motions are related with-
out directly editing the final ob-
servable law.
Non-Euclidean circumferential radius, con-
trolled rolling slip, conducting-area ratio,
and pressure-dependent jump distance.
Table 5: Scientific interpretations of the mechanism mutations.
A.2
Full-set and Core-set Membership
For each of the 16 families, the Full-set contains the Original mechanism and all 31 nonempty combinations of five
family-specific base mutations, for 32 instances per family and 512 instances in total. The Core-set is a fixed subset
containing two families per domain: Circular Orbit and Hall Response (physics); Lindemann Pulse Reaction and
Surface Pair Catalysis (chemistry); Allosteric Regulation and Membrane Channel Flux (biology); and Thermoelastic
Heating Response and Vacancy Diffusion (materials science). Each selected family contributes ten existing Full-set
instances: the Original, two single-mutation, two double-mutation, two triple-mutation, two four-mutation, and one
five-mutation instance. Thus the Core-set contains 80 instances and is stratified by mutation count rather than generated
as a separate collection.
A.3
Mechanism Mutations and Their Composition
A base mutation changes one or more relations within the reference mechanism. The phenomenal law for the resulting
variant is then derived from the modified mechanism rather than edited directly. We chose each mutation to admit a
concrete scientific reading and to preserve the dimensional consistency and operating regime of its family. The same
mathematical form can have different meanings in different families, and conversely a single scientific change may
require several equations. For example, introducing a reversible chemical intermediate requires a new state, forward
and reverse fluxes, and corresponding changes to multiple population balances. We group the changes descriptively in
Table 5; these categories provide directional guidance only, do not cover every possible mechanism mutation, and may
not apply to every task family.
Family-specific base mutations.
Every family has five labeled mutations ∆1, . . . , ∆5. Tables 6, 7, 8, and 9 catalog
their scientific content for physics, chemistry, biology, and materials science, respectively.
13


Table 6: The five base mutations for each physics task family.
Family
Mutation
Circular Orbit
∆1: Make relative inertia depend on radius.
∆2: Add a finite-range central attraction.
∆3: Modify circumferential geometry together with its radial derivative.
∆4: Add an external central trapping field.
∆5: Store tangential momentum in a coupled internal reservoir.
Hall Response
∆1: Trap a density-dependent fraction of electrons.
∆2: Change the electron magnetic-deflection response.
∆3: Add a minority-hole transport channel.
∆4: Change the transverse electric-force response.
∆5: Add a longitudinal bypass carrying no transverse Hall current.
Inclined Rolling
∆1: Make the body’s rotational inertia angle-dependent.
∆2: Replace no-slip rolling with a controlled slip ratio.
∆3: Couple an internal rotor to body rotation.
∆4: Add an angle-dependent resisting torque.
∆5: Apply an external upslope tangential force.
Terminal Settling
∆1: Add a saturating surface-friction channel.
∆2: Reduce displaced fluid volume through accessible pores.
∆3: Change the particle-local fluid viscosity.
∆4: Apply a radius-dependent external upward force.
∆5: Add a parallel dissipative internal-flow channel.
Table 7: The five base mutations for each chemistry task family.
Family
Mutation
Acid–Base Buffer
Relaxation
∆1: Split buffer sites between two acid families.
∆2: Introduce a slowly exchanging interior buffer region.
∆3: Add a diffusively coupled solvent pocket.
∆4: Add proton-catalyzed exchange without changing equilibrium capacity.
∆5: Insert a proton-storing relay between solution and primary buffer.
Competitive Inhibition Pulse
Reaction
∆1: Add substrate-assisted catalytic release.
∆2: Add inhibitor-assisted association to the inhibited state.
∆3: Insert a product-bound enzyme intermediate.
∆4: Allow slow reversible locking of inhibitor-bound enzyme.
∆5: Allow a mixed substrate–inhibitor enzyme complex.
Lindemann Pulse Reaction
∆1: Add a two-collision irreversible deactivation channel.
∆2: Insert a second reactive activated intermediate.
∆3: Allow reversible nonreactive cage storage before activation.
∆4: Add a reversible two-collider activation–deactivation channel.
∆5: Open a direct product-forming channel from unactivated reactant.
Surface Pair Catalysis
∆1: Insert a product-bearing surface intermediate.
∆2: Allow reversible immobilization of singly adsorbed A.
∆3: Add reversible collision-assisted A exchange beside adsorbed B.
∆4: Allow gas-A-assisted reversible exchange at the B site.
∆5: Open a gas–surface reaction channel from singly adsorbed B.
14


Table 8: The five base mutations for each biology task family.
Family
Mutation
Allosteric Regulation
∆1: Add an inactive conformation binding three regulators.
∆2: Couple inactive-state substrate affinity to substrate exposure.
∆3: Add another productive active-state complex.
∆4: Partition regulator into a local compartment.
∆5: Change inactive-conformation catalytic turnover.
Gene Repression
∆1: Add a looped state containing two repressors.
∆2: Allow a weakly productive repressor–polymerase complex.
∆3: Change repressor affinity with polymerase exposure.
∆4: Partition polymerase into a promoter-local compartment.
∆5: Add a repressor-dependent paused-polymerase state.
Membrane Channel Flux
∆1: Make channel opening voltage-dependent.
∆2: Add an extracellular-concentration-dependent inactivated state.
∆3: Partition the intracellular ion compartment.
∆4: Make channel permeability voltage-dependent.
∆5: Introduce a second monovalent species with proportionally clamped
reservoirs.
Population Resource Balance
∆1: Add feed-dependent mortality.
∆2: Partition organisms between active and protected compartments.
∆3: Add resource-consuming maintenance.
∆4: Reduce maximum birth frequency at high feed concentration.
∆5: Partition feed resource into usable and inaccessible pools.
Table 9: The five base mutations for each materials-science task family.
Family
Mutation
Composite Heat Transport
∆1: Make the first component’s conductivity depend on the imposed tem-
perature difference.
∆2: Add a composition-dependent thermal interface resistance.
∆3: Introduce a parallel conductive bypass.
∆4: Change the second component’s conducting area.
∆5: Apply controlled volumetric heating within the second component.
Grain-Boundary Electrical
Response
∆1: Add a thin space-charge region beside each boundary.
∆2: Add delayed boundary polarization.
∆3: Allow a parallel fast boundary path.
∆4: Add delayed polarization inside grains.
∆5: Include an additional boundary-local interface impedance.
Thermoelastic Heating
Response
∆1: Add a second thermal equilibration mode.
∆2: Add a recoverable anelastic strain reservoir.
∆3: Include finite elastic compliance of an adhesive layer.
∆4: Add a slow thermal-expansion reservoir.
∆5: Add a second anelastic strain-relaxation time.
Vacancy Diffusion
∆1: Trap a temperature-dependent fraction of vacancies.
∆2: Add a quadratic pressure contribution to the migration barrier.
∆3: Contract the effective atomic jump distance.
∆4: Introduce correlated return jumps.
∆5: Open a parallel activated migration channel.
15


Composition rule.
For a family with mutation index set S ⊆{1, . . . , 5}, we construct one mechanism M(S). If
mutations act on disjoint relations, the modified relations are simply included together. If they share a state or balance
equation, we construct the joint equation from the union of their fluxes or components, so that every contribution occurs
once and conservation is maintained. Shared constants and unchanged relations are likewise merged, not duplicated.
This construction makes the compositions order-independent: the name “Variant 1-3-5,” for example, denotes the set
S = {1, 3, 5}. The five base mutations in every family were selected and, where necessary, adjusted so that all subsets
are compatible; hence the Full-set retains all 25 = 32 choices of S, including S = ∅as Original.
We measure variant complexity by |S|, the number of selected base mutations. A single base mutation may modify
several related equations, but it still contributes one to |S|. We retain a composed mechanism only when its equations
admit a unique explicit algebraic solution for every internal quantity and the target as functions of the input and auxiliary
variables. After composing M(S), we eliminate its internal variables to obtain P(S) and derive the corresponding probe
answers. All variants are therefore constructed at the mechanism level before elimination.
Composition example: Vacancy Diffusion.
This family provides a compact example. Omitting unchanged zero-
valued channels, the Original mechanism contains
cv = exp

−Ef + pΩ
kBT

,
cm = cv,
(11)
Eb = Em,
r = ν exp

−Eb
kBT

,
D = a2cmr
6
.
(12)
Mutation 1 replaces only the mobile-vacancy relation with
cm =
cv
1 + 3 exp[−Et/(kBT)],
(13)
representing temperature-dependent trapping. Mutation 2 instead replaces the migration-barrier relation with
Eb = Em + Ωp2
pref
,
(14)
representing a nonlinear pressure contribution. Applying both changes gives the joint mechanism containing Eqs. 13
and 14, and elimination yields
P(1,2) :
D = a2ν
6
exp[−(Ef + pΩ)/(kBT)] exp[−(Em + Ωp2/pref)/(kBT)]
1 + 3 exp[−Et/(kBT)]
.
(15)
Thus the combined phenomenal law is a consequence of two changes made at different mechanistic locations. We probe
the mobile vacancy fraction cm and the migration barrier Eb separately, so matching their combined effect on D is not
sufficient to recover the mechanism.
A.4
Mechanism Probe Construction
Selection principles.
For each instance, we select scientifically interpretable internal quantities whose values follow
from the reference mechanism but are not fixed by the phenomenal law and the provided scientific context alone. A
probe is specified by a verbal description of the quantity and a reference expression z = gM(x). The expression is
obtained by solving the mechanism relations and eliminating the remaining internal variables, so it can ultimately be
evaluated from the observable inputs and known numerical constants. Although the final expression is a function of
observable inputs, deriving it still requires internal constitutive, balance, geometric, or dynamical relations absent from
P.
We use probes with clear scientific meanings. Eligible probe quantities must contribute to the derivation of the
phenomenal law: if removing the relations involving a quantity leaves the same phenomenal law derivable, that quantity
is omitted. A probe quantity must also have the same value across comparably plausible mechanisms consistent with the
observable evidence; otherwise, scoring it would reward agreement with the designated reference rather than recovery
of a mechanism supported by the available evidence. Mechanistic-indistinguishability screening in Section 3.3 enforces
the latter requirement.
Example.
In the Vacancy Diffusion composition above, the phenomenal law contains the product of the mobile
vacancy fraction and an activated jump rate. The probe for cm requires the equilibrium vacancy relation and the trapping
16


Split
Region for each xj
Samples
Agent access
Training
[lj, bj)
1,000
Yes
ID test
[lj, bj)
1,000
No
OOD test
[bj, uj)
1,000
No
Table 10: Default observation-generation configuration.
correction in Eq. 13, whereas the probe for Eb requires the pressure-dependent barrier relation in Eq. 14. Their reference
answers are
cm = exp[−(Ef + pΩ)/(kBT)]
1 + 3 exp[−Et/(kBT)] ,
Eb = Em + Ωp2
pref
.
(16)
Both are functions of observable inputs and known constants after the mechanism has been applied, but neither
factorization is determined by the single expression for D alone. Querying them separately therefore distinguishes
recovery of the trapping and pressure-barrier relations from recovery of their aggregate observable effect.
Variation across instances.
Probe sets are adapted to the active mechanism relations rather than held fixed across a
family. The Original instance uses a representative internal quantity from its reference mechanism. A single mutation
may change that quantity or replace it with a more diagnostic internal consequence; a composition may require several
probes to cover changes at distinct mechanistic locations. We do not require one probe per mutation because one
internal quantity can reflect several coupled changes, while some mutations introduce more than one scientifically
relevant consequence. Across the 512 Full-set instances, K ranges from one to five: 94 instances have one probe, 314
have two, 68 have three, 30 have four, and six have five.
A.5
Observation Generation and Task Specification
Reference expressions and valid domains.
Before generating observations, we solve the mechanism equations for
every internal variable and the target as explicit functions of the input and auxiliary variables. For each observable
source variable xj, we choose an instance-specific lower limit lj, extrapolation boundary bj, upper limit uj, and either a
uniform or log-uniform sampling distribution according to its scientific meaning, characteristic scale, and physically
meaningful operating regime. The resulting ranges also avoid known singularities or invalid regimes.
ID and OOD sampling.
We independently sample all source variables using their specified distributions. Training
observations and the held-out ID test set use xj ∈[lj, bj) for every j, whereas the OOD test set uses xj ∈[bj, uj) for
every j. Thus ID testing uses new draws from the same region as training, while OOD testing evaluates joint high-side
extrapolation across the source variables. The default configuration, used throughout the benchmark, is summarized in
Table 10.
The target and all internal quantities are evaluated from the solved reference mechanism for each sampled input.
Samples producing a non-real or non-finite value for any derived quantity are discarded and resampled. Generation uses
a task-local pseudorandom generator with default seed 0. No observational noise is added.
Information exposed during discovery.
The agent receives a short scientific task description; the name, description,
unit, and role of each observable input and target; the row order of the data array; and the training observations. The
array has shape (nvariables, 1000), with the target in the first row followed by the input and auxiliary variables. The task
description is identical across all variants of a family, and neither the instance identifier nor the active mutations are
disclosed. Sampling limits and distributions, internal variables, the reference M and P, mechanism-probe definitions
and answers, and the two held-out test sets remain inaccessible during discovery. For example, the discovery view for
the Vacancy Diffusion composition in Eqs. 13–15 contains the metadata shown below together with a four-row training
array in the listed variable order.
17


Setting
Base Model
Agent / Pipeline
Core
Full
Standard discovery
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
✓
✓
Standard discovery
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex
✓
✓
Standard discovery
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731
Codex
✓
Standard discovery
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
✓
Standard discovery
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731
Claude Code
✓
Standard discovery
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731
DeepSeek Harness
✓
Standard discovery
DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813
DeepSeek Harness
✓
Equation baseline
–
PySR
✓
✓
Pipeline baseline
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731
PySR + Direct-Ask
✓
✓
Gold-P
GPT-5.6-sol
Direct-Ask
✓
✓
Gold-P
GLM-5.3-flash
Direct-Ask
✓
✓
Gold-P
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731
Direct-Ask
✓
✓
Table 11: Model–agent configurations, baselines, and controls used in the experiments.
{
"task description":
"Determine atomic diffusivity from temperature, hydrostatic pressure, and
lattice spacing.",
"variables":
[
{"name":
"diffusivity", "description":
"Atomic tracer diffusivity.",
"unit":
"m^2 s^-1", "role":
"target"},
{"name":
"temp", "description":
"Temperature.",
"unit":
"K", "role":
"input"},
{"name":
"pressure", "description":
"Hydrostatic pressure.",
"unit":
"Pa", "role":
"input"},
{"name":
"spacing", "description":
"Lattice spacing.",
"unit":
"m", "role":
"input"}
],
"data columns":
["diffusivity", "temp", "pressure", "spacing"],
"data layout":
"variables by samples"
}
The agent must infer the observable law and its internal explanation from the shared scientific context and observations;
variant-specific metadata is not exposed.
Reference feedback script.
During the search process, the agent may repeatedly run a feedback script on a candidate
set of equations together with the public metadata and training observations. The script is provided as a reference
implementation that helps the agent understand the required mechanism-submission format, how the submitted equations
are algebraically eliminated to obtain the observable target, and how the resulting expression is evaluated on the training
set. For a valid candidate, it returns the explicit solution implied by the submitted equations and numerical fit metrics
computed on the training observations; malformed, inconsistent, or unsolved candidates instead return an error. It
reveals no information beyond the already available task description and training data, and does not access or report the
reference mechanism, the reference phenomenal law, mechanism probes, or held-out test sets.
Post-search probe queries.
After the search process ends, the submitted mechanism is locked, and each mechanism
probe is presented in an independent query. The query provides the scientific description of the requested probe quantity,
but not the reference probe answer or any held-out observations. Separating this later query from the discovery interface
prevents the probe itself from revealing the intended internal structure while the agent is constructing its mechanism.
B
Experimental Details
B.1
Evaluated Configurations
Table 11 summarizes the model–agent configurations and control conditions used in our experiments. All seven
standard-discovery configurations are evaluated on the Core-set. For the Full-set, we evaluate Codex with GPT-5.6-sol
and GLM-5.3-flash. PySR, PySR + Direct-Ask, and the Gold-P Direct-Ask controls are evaluated on both sets.
For standard discovery, Core-set results for Codex with GLM-5.3-flash and DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 are averaged
over three independent runs. All other reported standard-discovery configurations use a single run. For each repeated
18


configuration, metrics are first computed separately using the fixed task denominator and are then averaged across runs
rather than pooling predictions across runs.
B.2
Standard Discovery and Baselines
Standard discovery.
All agents interact with the same benchmark interface described in Appendix A.5. For each task,
the agent receives the scientific task description, observable-variable metadata, and training observations D. During
search, it may evaluate candidate mechanisms using the reference feedback script, which solves the submitted equations
when possible and reports objective fit information computed only from the training observations. The script does not
access the reference mechanism, the reference phenomenal law, mechanism probes, or held-out ID/OOD observations.
After search terminates, the final mechanism submission is locked before any mechanism probe is revealed.
PySR.
We use PySR as a non-LLM baseline for phenomenal-law discovery. PySR receives the same observable
training data and attempts to recover an equation relating the observable inputs to the target. Its recovered equation
is evaluated against the reference phenomenal law using the same phenomenal-law evaluation procedure as agent
submissions.
PySR + Direct-Ask.
To test whether an equation recovered by a conventional symbolic-regression method can
support subsequent mechanism reasoning, we additionally evaluate a two-stage PySR + Direct-Ask pipeline. PySR first
discovers a phenomenal equation from the training observations. DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 is then provided with this
recovered equation and independently answers the mechanism probes.
Gold-P Direct-Ask.
Gold-P Direct-Ask removes phenomenal-law discovery entirely. For each task, the model is
provided with the reference phenomenal law P together with the numerical constants required to interpret the requested
quantity. Each mechanism probe is asked in an independent, tool-free query. The model is not provided with the
reference mechanism or the reference probe expression. Success therefore depends on reconstructing enough internal
scientific structure to derive the requested quantity from the observable law and context.
B.3
Evaluation Metrics
Let Pi and bPi denote the reference and predicted phenomenal laws for task i, and let gik and bgik denote the reference
and predicted expressions for its k-th mechanism probe. Writing ≡for symbolic equivalence and Ki for the number of
probes associated with task i, we define
SA(P) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
h
bPi ≡Pi
i
,
(17)
and
SA(M) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Ki
Y
k=1
1[bgik ≡gik] .
(18)
Thus, SA(M) is a strict task-level mechanism-recovery metric: a task is counted as correct only when all of its
mechanism probes are symbolically correct. It is unconditional with respect to phenomenal-law recovery, so a
mechanism score is evaluated regardless of whether bPi is correct.
For the Core-set, we additionally report numerical agreement on the held-out ID and OOD splits. For S ∈{ID, OOD},
let yS
ij and byS
ij denote the reference and predicted target values for held-out sample j of task i. We define
AccS
0.1 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
"
max
j∈Si

byS
ij −yS
ij
yS
ij
 ≤0.1
#
.
(19)
This is a task-level accuracy rather than the fraction of individual samples within tolerance: a task is counted as correct
only if its maximum relative error over the entire held-out split does not exceed 10%.
B.4
Mutation Strata and Reported Subsets
We report results both over the complete benchmark subsets and after stratifying instances by mechanism familiarity.
The Original instance of each task family has mutation count zero, while constructed variants contain between one and
19


five applied base mutations. The Full-set contains one Original and all 31 nonempty mutation combinations for each of
its 16 task families. The Core-set is a fixed subset stratified by mutation count, as detailed in Appendix A.2.
For variant-only analyses, we exclude the Original instance from every included task family, yielding 496 Full-set
variants and 72 Core-set variants. Results stratified by mutation count and the complete variant-only results are reported
in Appendix C.2.
B.5
Implementation and Runtime Settings
Search and wall-clock budgets.
Standard discovery uses a 900-second wall-clock limit per task for Codex, Claude
Code, DeepSeek Harness, and PySR. Codex, Claude Code, and DeepSeek Harness have no benchmark-imposed
maximum number of agent turns and no cap on calls to the observable-fit feedback script; search is limited by wall-clock
time instead. In particular, the reported DeepSeek Harness runs set dsh-feedback-evaluations=0, selecting the
time-based prompt rather than the experimental fixed-evaluation prompt. No hard monetary budget is enabled for any
reported agent configuration. Mechanism-probe turns following standard discovery have a 120-second limit each and
are executed independently from the same frozen discovery result.
Reasoning settings.
Codex uses reasoning effort xhigh with GPT-5.6-sol, high with GLM-5.3-flash, and low with
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731. Claude Code uses high with GLM-5.3-flash and low with DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731. Both
DeepSeek Harness configurations use low. These settings control the provider’s reasoning mode rather than the number
of benchmark feedback evaluations.
Codex invocation.
Each discovery task launches codex exec with --json, --skip-git-repo-check, --color
never, the selected --model, and model reasoning effort; the prompt is supplied on standard input and the final
message is written with -o. The benchmark additionally sets approval policy="never", disables web search, apps,
plugins, hooks, multi-agent operation, memories, and shell snapshots, and installs a per-task permission policy. That
policy grants write access only to the temporary task workspace, denies the repository, answers, credentials, and shell
startup files, and allows network access only to the loopback feedback server. Probe turns use codex exec resume on
an independent copy of the frozen discovery transcript with a read-only sandbox and all shell, code-execution, browser,
image, and computer tools disabled.
Claude Code invocation.
Discovery uses claude --print --verbose --output-format stream-json
--include-partial-messages --input-format text --setting-sources ’’ --strict-mcp-config
--disable-slash-commands --permission-mode dontAsk, an empty MCP configuration, and --tools
Bash,Read,Write,Edit,Glob,Grep, followed by the selected --model and --effort. A generated settings file
disables hooks and memory, denies access outside the isolated task workspace, protects problem.json and train.npy
from writes, and restricts network access to the feedback host. Each probe uses --resume <frozen-session>
--fork-session with --tools ’’; consequently probe branches cannot alter either the frozen model or one another.
The optional Claude Code --max-budget-usd setting is unset in the reported experiments.
DeepSeek Harness invocation.
Discovery uses dsh --profile headless --patch <generated-patch>
<task-prompt>.
The generated patch fixes the requested OpenRouter model, disables web search/fetch, sub-
agents, workflows, and related tools, and routes model requests through the benchmark’s metered loopback gateway.
Probe profiles additionally disable filesystem, shell, job, skill, todo, and goal tools. The two reported models are
deepseek/deepseek-v4-flash-0731 and deepseek/deepseek-v4-pro-0813; OpenRouter failures do not fall
back to a different provider. The live discovery checkpoint is working model.txt. The gateway records token and
monetary usage but enforces no hard dollar limit.
Prompt comparability.
The three harnesses use prompts with the same scientific objective, observed data, mechanism
requirements, access to the observable-fit feedback script, equation-only submission contract, 900-second budget, and
isolation rules. Harness-specific wording and checkpoint conventions remain; DeepSeek Harness, for example, refers
to working model.txt rather than submission.txt. Each CLI also retains its native system instructions and tool
descriptions. After discovery, all three standard agents receive the same benchmark-generated mechanism-probe task
prompt, and every probe is evaluated in an independent branch from the frozen submitted model.
Sampling, context, and output limits.
The standard Codex and Claude Code launches do not explicitly set
temperature, top-p, maximum context length, or maximum output tokens; these remain the selected CLI/provider
defaults and no uniform values are available in the run receipts. DeepSeek Harness likewise does not override
temperature or top-p, but caps each model response at 16,000 output tokens.
20


PySR hyperparameters.
PySR is run for the same 900-second wall-clock budget with niterations=1,000,000,
so the timeout rather than the nominal iteration count normally terminates search. We use 31 populations, maximum
expression size 30, 64-bit internal precision, multithreaded parallelism, and model selection="accuracy"; popula-
tion size and other unlisted evolutionary settings retain PySR defaults. Binary operators are +, −, ×, division, and |x|y.
Unary operators are square, cube,
p
|x|, exp(x), log |x|, sin(x), cos(x), and |x|. The exponent operator uses the PySR
constraint (-1,3), and exp uses constraint 8. Nested exponentials and nested sine/cosine compositions are disallowed.
Each task’s recorded batch seed is passed to PySR as its random state; seeds are task-specific rather than fixed to a
common value.
B.6
Direct-Ask Prompt and Runtime
Gold-P prompt template.
Gold-P replaces the frozen submission in the common mechanism-probe template with
the exact reference phenomenal equation after eliminating internal variables. It also discloses named numerical-constant
equations and numerical literals labelled by the mechanism quantity whose defining equation contains them. The
user-message template is:
Frozen submitted phenomenal model:
{reference phenomenal equation}
Known named numerical constants for this task:
{name = numeric value, or (none)}
Additional numerical constant values, labelled by the mechanism
quantity whose defining equation contains them (without disclosing
the equation itself):
{quantity: numeric literals, or (none)}
Using the phenomenal model and known numerical constants above,
derive {probe name} ({probe description}) as a function of:
{variables}.
Return exactly one equation in the form:
{probe name} = <expression>
Use only the given variables, numeric literals, and supported
operators/functions. Do not add variables, equations, or prose;
do not modify the frozen phenomenal model; and do not use tools.
Direct-Ask execution.
Each probe is a fresh one-turn, tool-free query; probe answers do not share conversational
state. The GPT-5.6-sol control uses Codex with medium reasoning effort and a 300-second timeout. The GLM-5.3-
flash control uses direct OpenRouter chat-completions requests with temperature=0, minimal reasoning effort, an
8,192-token output cap, a 600-second request timeout, and up to four transport attempts. The reported DeepSeek-v4-
flash-0731 Gold-P control uses temperature=0, minimal reasoning effort, a 2,048-token output cap, a 180-second
request timeout, and up to four transport attempts. The PySR + Direct-Ask pipeline uses the same direct-API system
instruction and decoding contract as the latter, also with temperature=0, minimal reasoning effort, a 2,048-token
output cap, a 180-second request timeout, and up to four attempts.
Direct-Ask system instruction.
For direct OpenRouter requests, the system message is: “Answer the user’s
mechanism probe directly from the supplied frozen equation. Follow its output contract exactly: emit one plain-text
equation and no reasoning, prose, Markdown, or additional equations.” The Codex version appends the same one-
equation contract to the user prompt and disables filesystem, network, shell, web, and other tools while retaining its
native system scaffolding.
Agent failures.
A run is treated as an agent-side failure when the agent execution itself is available for evaluation but
its answer is unusable or scientifically wrong: examples include an empty checkpointed working model, malformed or
unparsable equations, a model that cannot jointly solve the required variables, multiple or prose-bearing Direct-Ask
answers, and an incorrect numerical or symbolic result. We re-run these failed cases up to five times until they succeed;
runs that fail to submit a valid answer after five attempts are recorded as failures.
21


Table 12: Complete Full-set symbolic-recovery results by scientific domain.
Base model
Agent / condition
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Materials
P
M
P
M
P
M
P
M
No LLM
PySR
0.78
–
0.00
–
0.00
–
0.00
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 PySR + Direct-Ask 0.78 0.78 0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
25.78 9.38 17.19 12.50 13.28 5.47 7.81 3.91
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex
10.16 3.12 0.78
0.00
2.34 2.34 3.91 1.56
C
Experimental Results
C.1
Complete Recovery and Numerical-Accuracy Results
Tables 3 and 12 give the complete domain-level symbolic-recovery results underlying the aggregate values in Table 1.
For the two three-run Codex configurations, the rate is computed separately for each run and then averaged. As
in the main text, SA(M) is the strict task-level measure that requires every mechanism probe for an instance to be
symbolically correct.
Codex with GPT-5.6-sol has the highest overall SA(P) and SA(M) on both sets and leads mechanism recovery in
each Full-set domain. The size of the phenomenal–mechanistic gap nevertheless varies substantially. On the Core-set,
for example, this configuration recovers 40.00% of phenomenal laws but only 10.00% of mechanisms in biology, and
recovers no complete mechanism in materials despite recovering 20.00% of phenomenal laws.
Table 13 further reports all 16 Full-set task families for the two standard discovery configurations evaluated over the
Full-set. A task family that is easier for phenomenal recovery is not necessarily easier for mechanism recovery. For
GPT-5.6-sol, Inclined Rolling has the highest phenomenal recovery (50.00%) but only 6.25% mechanism recovery,
whereas Competitive Inhibition Pulse Reaction reaches 31.25% and 25.00%, respectively. Conversely, several families
have nonzero phenomenal recovery but no completely recovered mechanism.
Finally, Table 14 reports the complete Core-set numerical results. Numerical agreement is less stringent than exact
symbolic recovery: Codex with GPT-5.6-sol attains AccID
0.1 = 55.00% and AccOOD
0.1
= 43.75%, compared with
SA(P) = 35.00%. The same separation is visible for the smaller models, whose overall symbolic recovery is at most
10.00% while their OOD numerical accuracy ranges from 16.25% to 25.00%. OOD accuracy is lower than ID accuracy
for every reported agent configuration.
C.2
Results by Mutation Count and Variant Subset
Table 15 reports aggregate recovery after excluding the Original instance from every included task family. The resulting
variant-only subsets contain 72 Core-set and 496 Full-set instances. For Codex with GPT-5.6-sol, removing the Original
instances reduces SA(P) from 35.00% to 30.56% on the Core-set and from 16.02% to 14.11% on the Full-set. The
corresponding strict SA(M) values decrease from 13.75% to 9.72% and from 7.81% to 6.05%, respectively. The other
standard discovery configurations achieve at most 4.17% phenomenal recovery and 1.39% mechanism recovery on the
Core-set variants; Codex with GLM-5.3-flash reaches 3.23% and 0.81% on the Full-set variants.
Tables 16 and 17 further stratify recovery by the number of applied mutations. For Codex with GPT-5.6-sol, Core-set
SA(P) declines from 75.00% on Original instances to 75.00%, 31.25%, 25.00%, 6.25%, and 0.00% with one through
five mutations. Strict SA(M) declines more sharply, from 50.00% on Original instances to 37.50% with one mutation,
6.25% with two mutations, and zero with three or more. The Full-set shows the same broad pattern: phenomenal
recovery falls from 75.00% on Original instances to zero at five mutations, while mechanism recovery falls from
62.50% to zero by four mutations.
For the smaller models, most successful recoveries are concentrated among Original and single-mutation instances.
On the Core-set, none of these standard discovery configurations recovers a complete mechanism with three or more
mutations, and only isolated phenomenal-law successes remain beyond two mutations. The Full-set GLM-5.3-flash
configuration similarly reaches only 0.63% phenomenal recovery at three mutations and no phenomenal or mechanism
recovery at four or five mutations.
22


Table 13: Full-set symbolic-recovery results by task family for the two standard discovery configurations evaluated on
all 512 instances. Each family contains 32 instances.
Domain
Task family
Codex (GPT-5.6-sol) Codex (GLM-5.3-flash)
P
M
P
M
Physics
Circular Orbit
21.88
15.63
9.38
3.12
Hall Response
25.00
12.50
3.12
6.25
Inclined Rolling
50.00
6.25
28.12
3.12
Terminal Settling
6.25
3.12
0.00
0.00
Chemistry
Acid–Base Buffer Relaxation
3.12
3.12
0.00
0.00
Competitive Inhibition Pulse Reaction 31.25
25.00
3.12
0.00
Lindemann Pulse Reaction
25.00
15.63
0.00
0.00
Surface Pair Catalysis
9.38
6.25
0.00
0.00
Biology
Allosteric Regulation
18.75
3.12
0.00
0.00
Gene Repression
21.88
12.50
9.38
9.38
Membrane Channel Flux
9.38
3.12
0.00
0.00
Population Resource Balance
3.12
3.12
0.00
0.00
Materials
Composite Heat Transport
12.50
12.50
12.50
6.25
Grain-Boundary Electrical Response
3.12
3.12
0.00
0.00
Thermoelastic Heating Response
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Vacancy Diffusion
15.63
0.00
3.12
0.00
Table 14: Core-set numerical accuracy by scientific domain. Each entry is the percentage of tasks whose maximum
relative error over the indicated split is at most 0.1. A dash denotes an unavailable OOD result.
Base model
Agent
Physics
Chemistry
Biology
Materials
ID
OOD
ID
OOD
ID
OOD
ID
OOD
No LLM
PySR
35.00
–
0.00
–
20.00
–
0.00
–
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
55.00 45.00 50.00 50.00 60.00 45.00 55.00 35.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex (3-run avg.) 56.67 40.00 18.33 8.33 53.33 10.00 38.33 25.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
60.00 50.00 20.00 15.00 35.00 10.00 35.00 25.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Codex (3-run avg.) 45.00 36.67 18.33 11.67 46.67 16.67 38.33 23.33
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Claude Code
35.00 20.00 25.00 25.00 30.00 15.00 35.00 25.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 DeepSeek Harness 60.00 35.00 5.00
0.00 50.00 15.00 40.00 15.00
DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813
DeepSeek Harness 45.00 25.00 10.00 10.00 35.00 15.00 45.00 30.00
C.3
Statistical Comparisons
Base-model comparisons.
GPT-5.6-sol significantly outperforms both flash models across phenomenal recovery,
mechanism recovery, and OOD numerical accuracy. For each comparison, we first average the flash model’s binary
outcome within each task and then apply a paired Wilcoxon test over the 80 tasks Wilcoxon (1945). After Holm
correction across the six model–metric comparisons Holm (1979), GPT-5.6-sol exceeds GLM-5.3-flash by 28.75
percentage points in SA(P), 10.83 points in SA(M), and 22.92 points in OOD Acc0.1, with adjusted p < .001,
p = .008, and p < .001, respectively. Its corresponding advantages over DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 are 27.08, 10.00, and
21.67 points, with the same adjusted significance levels. Thus, the performance advantage of GPT-5.6-sol is present in
all three evaluated outcomes.
Base-model and harness comparisons.
With Codex fixed, paired Wilcoxon comparisons between DeepSeek-v4-
flash-0731 and GLM-5.3-flash detect no difference in phenomenal recovery (p = .234), mechanism recovery (p = .414),
or OOD numerical accuracy (p = .662). Exact McNemar comparisons under Claude Code McNemar (1947) give the
23


Table 15: Variant-only symbolic-recovery results after excluding Original instances. Codex with GLM-5.3-flash and
Codex with DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 use three runs only on the Core-set. A dash denotes a metric or set that is not
evaluated for the corresponding configuration.
Base model
Agent
Core-set variants Full-set variants
SA(P)
SA(M)
SA(P)
SA(M)
No LLM
PySR
0.00
–
0.00
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 PySR + Direct-Ask
–
0.00
–
0.00
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
30.56
9.72
14.11
6.05
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex (3-run avg. / 1 run)
2.78
0.46
3.23
0.81
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
4.17
1.39
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Codex (3-run avg.)
3.24
0.46
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Claude Code
2.78
1.39
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 DeepSeek Harness
1.39
0.00
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813
DeepSeek Harness
4.17
0.00
–
–
Table 16: Core-set symbolic recovery stratified by the number of applied mutations. Mutation count zero denotes
Original instances.
Base model
Agent
SA(P) by mutation count
SA(M) by mutation count
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
No LLM
PySR
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00
–
–
–
–
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 PySR + Direct-Ask
–
–
–
–
–
–
12.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
75.00 75.00 31.25 25.00 6.25 0.00 50.00 37.50 6.25 0.00 0.00 0.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex (3-run avg.) 37.50 8.33
0.00
4.17 0.00 0.00 25.00 2.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Claude Code
50.00 12.50 6.25
0.00 0.00 0.00 25.00 0.00 6.25 0.00 0.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Codex (3-run avg.) 50.00 8.33
6.25
0.00 0.00 0.00 33.33 2.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 Claude Code
37.50 12.50 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 25.00 6.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 DeepSeek Harness 50.00 6.25
0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 25.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
DeepSeek-v4-pro-0813
DeepSeek Harness 62.50 18.75 0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 37.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
same conclusion (p = .688, 1.000, and .607). Holding DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 fixed and comparing Codex, Claude
Code, and DeepSeek Harness on the same 80 tasks, Cochran’s Q test Cochran (1950) is nonsignificant for all three
metrics (p = .867, .607, and .264). For GLM-5.3-flash, paired Wilcoxon comparisons between Codex and Claude Code
are likewise nonsignificant (p = .152, .655, and .075). Accordingly, the present comparisons distinguish GPT-5.6-sol
from the flash models, but do not establish a performance difference between the two flash models or among the
evaluated harnesses.
Domain comparisons.
We find no statistically significant performance difference among physics, chemistry, biology,
and materials science. We summarize each Core-set task by its mean outcome across the 11 standard-discovery runs
and compare the resulting four groups of 20 tasks using the Kruskal–Wallis test Kruskal & Wallis (1952). The domain
effect is nonsignificant for SA(P) (p = .363), strict SA(M) (p = .092), and OOD Acc0.1 (p = .149). Although
physics has the highest descriptive mean on all three metrics, the current evidence does not support a general domain-
level performance ordering; the family-level differences reported in Section 5.4 instead indicate that difficulty varies
substantially within domains.
Table 18 provides the rates and p values for all comparisons discussed above. For the GPT-5.6-sol comparisons, the
displayed p values are Holm-adjusted; the other entries are the corresponding two-sided paired or omnibus tests.
24


Table 17: Full-set symbolic recovery stratified by the number of applied mutations. Mutation count zero denotes
Original instances.
Base model
Agent
SA(P) by mutation count
SA(M) by mutation count
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
No LLM
PySR
6.25
0.00
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
–
–
–
–
–
–
DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 PySR + Direct-Ask
–
–
–
–
–
–
6.25
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
GPT-5.6-sol
Codex
75.00 40.00 15.00 8.13 1.25 0.00 62.50 25.00 5.63 0.63 0.00 0.00
GLM-5.3-flash
Codex
37.50 13.75 2.50 0.63 0.00 0.00 31.25 5.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Table 18: Core-set statistical comparisons across base models, harnesses, and scientific domains. Rates follow the
order of the groups named in each row. Codex rates for the two flash models are task-level averages over three runs
except in the three-harness DeepSeek comparison, which uses the first Codex run alongside the single Claude Code and
DeepSeek Harness runs.
Factor
Comparison or grouping
Metric
Rates (%)
p
Base model GPT-5.6-sol vs GLM-5.3-flash (Codex)
SA(P)
35.00 / 6.25
< .001
SA(M)
13.75 / 2.92
.008
AccOOD
0.1
43.75 / 20.83
< .001
GPT-5.6-sol vs DeepSeek-v4-flash-0731 (Codex) SA(P)
35.00 / 7.92
< .001
SA(M)
13.75 / 3.75
.008
AccOOD
0.1
43.75 / 22.08
< .001
Base model DeepSeek vs GLM (Codex)
SA(P)
7.92 / 6.25
.234
SA(M)
3.75 / 2.92
.414
AccOOD
0.1
22.08 / 20.83
.662
DeepSeek vs GLM (Claude Code)
SA(P)
6.25 / 8.75
.688
SA(M)
3.75 / 3.75
1.000
AccOOD
0.1
21.25 / 25.00
.607
Harness
Codex / Claude Code / DSH (DeepSeek)
SA(P)
5.00 / 6.25 / 6.25
.867
SA(M)
3.75 / 3.75 / 2.50
.607
AccOOD
0.1
23.75 / 21.25 / 16.25
.264
Codex vs Claude Code (GLM)
SA(P)
6.25 / 8.75
.152
SA(M)
2.92 / 3.75
.655
AccOOD
0.1
20.83 / 25.00
.075
Domain
Physics / chemistry / biology / materials
SA(P)
15.9 / 10.5 / 6.4 / 6.8
.363
SA(M)
11.4 / 5.0 / 0.9 / 0.0
.092
AccOOD
0.1
36.8 / 14.5 / 16.4 / 25.0
.149
25
