Title: Qumus_arxiv

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.18407v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 02:34:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Qumus: Realization of An Embodied AI Quantum Material Experimentalist 

Lihan Shi 1,2,# , Zhaoyi Joy Zheng 1,2,# , Xinzhe Juan 3,# , Yimin Wang 3,# , Ming Yin 2,4,# , Mayank 

Sengupta 1,4 , Kristina Wolinski 1, Yanyu Jia 1, Jingzhi Shi 5, Derek Saucedo 1,6 , Neill Saggi 1, Haosen 

Guan 1, Kenji Watanabe 7, Takashi Taniguchi 8, Ali Yazdani 1, Mengdi Wang 2,4 , Sanfeng Wu 1,*  

> 1

Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA  

> 2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 

08544, USA  

> 3

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 

48109, USA  

> 4

Princeton AI Lab, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA  

> 5

Currently unaffiliated, Incoming graduate student at Princeton ECE  

> 6

Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Northridge, Northridge, California 

91330, USA  

> 7

Research Center for Electronic and Optical Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1 -1

Namiki, Tsukuba 305 -0044, Japan  

> 8

Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1 -1 Namiki, 

Tsukuba 305 -0044, Japan  

> #

These authors contributed equally to this work 

> *

Email: sanfengw@princeton.edu 

While modern Large Language Models 1–4 (LLMs) and agentic artificial intelligence (AI) 5–9

have demonstrated transformative capabilities in digital domains , the realiz ation of 

embodied AI capable of real -world scientific discovery 10 –18 remains a difficult frontier. The 

advancements are hindered by the inherent complexity of integrating high -level reasoning ,

multimodal information processing and real -time physical execution . Here we introduce 

Qumus, the first AI quantum materials experimentalist. Physically embodied within a 

robotic mini -laboratory, Qumus is an intelligent, multimodal, and multi -agent system 

designed for the creation and nano -processing of atomically thin two -dimensional (2D) 

materials and stacked van der Waals (vdW) structures. Qumus autonomously navigates the 

full scientific cycle, from hypothesis generation and protocol planning to multi -step 

experimental execution, result analysis and reporting, acting as an experimentalist. 

Markedly, the system has achieved, for the first time, the AI -creation of graphene, as well as 

the first AI -fabrication of complex nanodevices including atomically thin field -effect 

transistors via vdW stacking. Qumus excels at thes e tasks by demonstrating autonomous 

error correction and closed -loop experimentation. Our results establish a generalizable 

framework for self -improving embodied AI systems that learn directly from the quantum 

world, opening a pathway toward accelerated di scovery in quantum materials, electronics 

and beyond. 

Main 

2D quantum materials are a class of atomically thin crystals and their derived structures that exhibit 

rich electronic, optical, and quantum phenomena. The field was sparked by the invention of the Scotch -tape -based mechanical exfoliation of graphene in 2004 19–21, which launched extensive 

worldwide endeavor to investigate 2D crystals. In principle, thousands of known layered crystals 

can potentially be exfoliated down to the atomically thin limit 22,2 3, which can be further integrated 

into van der Waals (vdW) stacks and moiré materials that can substantially alter the material 

properties 24–31. In sharp contrast to the enormous possibilities, experiments on 2D materials and 

moiré materials in the labora tory remain largely concentrated on a small set of familiar crystals, 

such as the graphene class and several transition -metal dichalcogenides, despite the extensive 

efforts over two decades 24–31. Beyond the lab, many promised applications, including vdW -

material -based electronics 24,2 8,30 ,3 2–34, have yet to be achieved. A central bottleneck in both 

laboratory and industrial -scale applications is the inefficient manual process of synthesis, 

identification, transfer, and assembly of high -quality flakes and dev ices 35–44. The many -step 

workflows are time -consuming, difficult to reproduce, and heavily dependent on expert intuition 

and iterative troubleshooting; for many air -sensitive materials, repeated manual handling is 

impractical for human researchers. 

To address these challenges, previous efforts have automated certain steps of 2D material 

workflows 45–51 using either rule -based approaches or machine learning methods from the pre -LLM 

era. While such methods have made important progress, they fall short of providing a seamless, 

end -to -end autonomous process spanning exfoliation, flake search, transfer, and vdW stacking 

without human intervention. More importantly, these systems, not driven by language models, 

lacked the cognitive framework required for sci entific inquiry. Lacking the ability to reason, 

hypothesize, or iterate, they functioned as automated tools rather than genuine AI experimentalists. 

In this work, we introduce Qumus, the first closed -loop AI quantum material experimentalist 

designed for th e fully autonomous creation of 2D crystals, vdW stacks, and devices. Qumus is a 

self -evolving, multimodal, and multi -agent AI system embodied within a robotic minilab. 

Qumus AI Architecture 

A truly intelligent AI experimentalist should possess a suite of defining capabilities within a 

closed -loop framework: interpreting scientific requests, reasoning, proposing hypotheses, 

planning and executing experiments, observing and analyzing results, u pdating plans as needed 

and reporting the outcome. Together, these functions form an integrated and iterative feedback 

cycle ( Fig. 1a ) capable of achieving complex scientific objectives. Inspired by the structure of 

human research groups, where a principal investigator (lead agent) manages multiple researchers 

(sub -agents) responsible for distinct sub -tasks, Qumus employs an organizatio nal structure where 

central AI orchestrates a team of sub -agents with specialized Skill sets ( Figs. 1b & c, Extended 

Data Table 1 ) to ensure efficient collaboration and communication. 

The lead agent, Qumus, plays the central role of reasoning, planning, coordinating teamwork and 

communicating with external users (e.g., humans). It interprets the scientific goal, determines 

whether the request is sufficiently specified, translates the go al into one or more experimental 

milestones, makes an experimental plan, and executes it by delegating tasks to sub -agents. The lead agent also integrates feedback reported by the specialized agents, reformulates the task when 

prerequisite subtasks are required, selects among candidate experimental proposals, and generates 

final reports summarizing workflows, parameters, results, a nd evaluation. 

Key sub -agents include Project Manager Agent, Lab Manager Agent, Device Expert Agent and 

Processing Agent, and their functional modules are summarized in Fig. 1b and Methods . We 

outline their respective roles. The Project Manager has access to prior experimental knowledge, 

including literature, local experimental history, and registered Skills and recipes to inform 

planning. The Lab Manager assesses laboratory readiness by checking material inventory, 

instrument status, and tool positioning via computer vis ion. The Device Expert generates and 

refines device -layout proposals, including 2D flake stacking order, positions, and twist angles 

given the available materials and target device specifications. The Processing Agent converts 

requested experimental goals into executable laboratory actions : it retrieves existing workflows or 

self -generates new ones, and reports outcomes back to Qumus and the database for future reuse. 

A key design principle of the Processing Agent is that it operates via a hierarchical workflow 

structure consisting of (i) “Atom Workflows” , which are fixed unit executable functions provided 

by the user at the instrumental level to perform simple operations, such as robotic arm control, 

stage movement control, camera control, vacuum control, tape handling, etc; (ii) “Molecule 

Workflows” , which are combinations of multiple atomic workflows (building blocks) that together 

accomplish a more complex function, such as chip exfoliation, automated search, or flake re -

location; and (iii) “Assembly Workflows” , which are larger combinations of atomic and molecular 

workflows that implement extended multi -stage experimental procedures, such as repeated 

exfoliation, stacking, or other longer fabrication sequences. This hierarchical structure is key to 

achieving ro bust experiments by fixing the “atom workflows” while enabling AI self -generated 

workflows at the “Molecule” and “Assembly” levels, important for Qumus self -evo lution. 

The Robotic Minilab 

We designed and built a robotic hardware platform that integrates automated Scotch -tape 

exfoliation, optical inspection, precision 2D crystal transfer and vdW stacking under a microscope 

and sample storage into a single compact workstation ( Fig. 1d ). The system combines a tape -

transfer gantry, robotic handling arms, heated sample stages, a microscope inspection module, and 

multiple precision motion stages, collectively enabling full hardware automation of every physical 

step in 2D material mechanica l exfoli ation, processing and stacked device fabrication. Tape 

handling, including dispensing, positioning, peeling, and collection of used tape, is automated 

through a dual -wheel motorized feed system. Materials, such as raw material carriers, bare silicon 

chips, and device substrates, are handled and transported by two robotic arms positioned around 

the central workspace (exfoliation and stacking stages) and among three material storage tables. Qumus is equipped with multimodal computer vision across scales, from the macroscopic to the 

microscopic. To recognize all macroscopic objects necessary for the functions, we train a computer 

vision algorithm using YOLO 52–54 using two top -mounted cameras ( Extended Data Fig. 1) . We 

attach micro -QR codes to key objects to ensure robust AI recognition, accurate coordinate 

mapping, and sample/consumable information to be processed. At the microscopic scale, 2D flake 

identification has been well explored. In our setup, optical inspe ction is handled by a multi -

magnification optical microscope equipped with a motorized focus module for automated z -axis 

focusing, enabling autonomous microscale on -chip feature detection and 2D flake id entification 

across large substrates 55. Temperature -controlled stations with vacuum holders immobilize the 

substrates and stamps during exfoliation, search, and stacking operations. Submicron -level 

alignment and transfer are achieved by two coordinated precision motion systems: a multi -axis 

st amp alignment stage and a multi -axis sample positioning stage, which together provide the 

translational and rotational degrees of freedom required for high precision 2D materials stacking. 

More details about the roboti c hardware can be found in Methods and Extended Data Fig. 2 .

The First AI Creation of Graphene 

With Qumus AI embodied within the robotic minilab, the system can interact with human 

researchers (or external AI agents) using natural language, analyze tasks, plan, and execute 

experiments. We first demonstrate that Qumus can autonomously and robustly pl an and complete 

complex experimental workflows. A user can simply enter a user request through the user interface 

(Methods ), e.g., “Can you give me a graphene flake?” Fig. 2a illustrates the information flow of 

the collaborative agentic system upon receivi ng the request. In a typical process, Qumus first 

consults the Project Manager to understand the nature of the experiments and receives suggested 

experimental recipes, based on which it proposes and broadcasts a plan book ( Fig. 2b ). Qumus 

then executes the plan, step by step, by delegating the task in each step to a corresponding sub -

agent and collects feedback after each step. For instance, Lab Manager may be triggered to provide 

information about the inventory of raw materials an d instrumental status, and if no graphene or 

unsearched graphene chip is found in the inventory, Processing Agent will be triggered to execute 

the full exfoliation and flake -search process ( Figs. 2c & d, Extended Data Fig. 3 ) until a piece of 

graphene is created, found, recorded and reported. Fig. 2e shows a representative graphene flake 

created by Qumus. The entire process is fully autonomous, with multiple closed -loop decision -

making processes by Qumus and its managed agents without any human input ( Supplementary 

Demo Video 1 ). Th e only required human involvement is to provide raw materials and electricity. 

Characterizations of Qumus as an Experimentalist 

The multi -agent, collaborative architecture of Qumus ensures robust end -to -end experimental 

execution. We characterized Qumus across 6 leading LLMs: GPT, Gemini, Claude, Grok, Qwen 

and DeepSeek, all of which successfully accomplished the requested experime nts. While each 

model performs rather consistently within itself, Qumus exhibits distinct behavioral characteristics 

across models, analogous to the differing personalities of human experimentalists. As an example, by decomposing each experiment into reasoning, observation, and execution phases ( Fig. 2f ), we 

can quantify metrics such as “bias for action” that capture each Qumus -LLM model’s tendency 

toward deliberation versus direct execution ( Methods ). We characterize the personalities along 

seven dimensions: protocol alignment, caution, bias for action, token efficiency, agent efficiency, 

consistency and report quality, as summarized in radar charts in Fig. 2g & Extended Data Fig. 4. 

The defining characteristic of an AI experimentalist is its ability to reason, hypothesize, design 

experiments to test the hypotheses, observe, analyze, and autonomously iterate this cycle toward 

a scientific goal or conclusion. To test this ability, we po sed an open -ended user prompt “I want a 

graphene flake larger than 200 μm 2”, and cleared all prior experimental history, forcing Qumus to 

begin its exploration from scratch. This triggered Qumus to explore the parameter space for 

exfoliating a large graphe ne flake: substrate heating temperature ( T), heating dwell time ( t), 

number of massage cycles ( n), and tape peel -off speed ( v). Fig. 3a showcases a representative run 

of Qumus powered by Claude Sonnet 4.6. Much like a seasoned human experimentalist, Qumus 

began by formulating a starting hypothesized recipe based on common sense and general 

knowledge, executed the experiment, and then iter atively refined its approach based on observed 

outcomes. In this case study, the initial parameter guess was already a strong start (likely reflecting 

the existing knowledge in the traini ng data of LLM) but produced a near -miss result. Crucially, 

Qumus responded to the outcome with a highly logical, observation and evidence -based reasoning 

process, systematically exploring the parameter space and eventually reverting toward more 

productive recipes when new recipes yielded significantly lower flake yield. After five consecutive 

experimental runs spanning over four hours, Qumus successfully achieved the goal and produced 

a graphene flake larger than 200 um 2 without any human intervention. 

The demonstration establishes Qumus as an experimentalist as defined in Fig. 1a . It also 

demonstrates that Qumus is goal -oriented, equipped with long -term memory and capable of 

autonomously executing complex, multi -step scientific tasks over extended time horizons. 

Autonomous Error Correction & Closed -Loop Experimentation 

We further highlight interesting features of Qumus. A particularly notable capability is its ability 

to detect and correct errors autonomously, crucial for operational robustness in real -world lab 

settings. Fig. 3b and Supplementary Demo Video 2 summarize a case study of Qumus creating 

hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), an important dielectric material for 2D devices. First, a totally 

unexpected error was introduced mid -experiment: a human removed its newly exfoliated silicon 

chip that was actively u nder proces sing, without any human notification to the system. Qumus 

autonomously detected the problem through computer vision, verified the absence of the chip, and 

then formulated a recovery plan to resolve the issue (i.e., re -exfoliating a new chip). In this new 

run, however, the Processing Agent hallucinated, an intrinsic LLM error, and mistakenly labeled 

the material under processing as “Graphene” instead of “hBN”. This again resulted in a null 

outcome. Qumus analyzed the situation and again came up with a soluti on to exfoliate a new chip, 

eventually successfully completing the experiment. The entire error -detection and correction process required no external input or human intervention of any kind. It demonstrates that Qumus 

is a closed -loop AI experimentalist with robust performance capable of autonomous error 

correction. 

Qumus Orchestration and AI -Creation of an Atomically Thin Transistor 

To demonstrate Qumus’ ability to execute complex, multi -stage experimental projects, a user 

asked the system: “Can you give me a graphene transistor?” A SiO 2/conductive Si substrate with 

pre -deposited metal contacts was loaded as an input material registered in the database. Fig. 4a 

summarizes the resulting agentic orchestration and cooperation network. Qumus first analyzed the 

request and consulted the Project Manager to define an executable device strategy and determined 

the device stack as hBN/graphene placed on metal contacts on SiO 2, with conductive Si substrate 

serving as a back gate. It then decomposed the objective into sequential subtasks and delegated 

each step to the appropriate specialist agent ( Fig. 4b ). In this case study ( Figs. 4c -g), the Lab 

Manager confirmed that grap hene flakes and a user -loaded conductive SiO 2/Si substrate with 

prepatterned electrodes were already present in the material database. However, no hexagonal 

boron nitride (hBN) flake was available, and Qumus therefore delegated the Processing Agent to 

acquire an hBN flake. After hBN flakes were exfol iated, searched, and stored in the materials 

database, Qumus delegated the device layout to the Device Expert, which selected the best 

candidate flakes and designed the device layout based on these selected flak es under geometric 

and physical constraints, returning the selected flake information, stacking order and device layout. 

Qumus then passed the approved design and complete stacking payload to the Processing Agent, 

which autonomously controlled the full transfer module to pick up and stack the flakes on to the 

electrode substrate via 2D -material dry transfer . The full process took approximately 90 minutes 

and comprised 30 steps and 18 decision -making calls, all successfully completed by Qumus and 

its collabor ative agent network without human intervention ( Supplementary Demo Video 3 ). 

Figs. 4h & i show the resulting Qumus -fabricated graphene field -effect transistor, demonstrating 

a marked achievement for AI design and fabrication of a quantum material device. More details 

about the robotic hardware can be found in Methods and Extended Data Fig. 5 .

Self -Evolving Modules 

Qumus is intrinsically self -evolving 9. This is evidenced by its ability to plan experiments based on 

prior history, made possible by a set of structured databases that record not only materials created, 

but also prior experimental traces across all levels including reasoning chains, individua l

experiments, and overarching projects. Beyond memories, Qumus progressively accumulates 

experimental skills, including composite workflows and fabrication recipes (both can be self -

generated) that were tested in real experimental runs. In subsequent expe riments, the Project 

Manager can retrieve and inform relevant Skill sets to Qumus ( Figs. 1b & c ), enabling self -

improvement. Here we have only reported the initial experiments conducted by Qumus. We expect 

Qumus soon to expand its capabilities to a broader suite of materials and devices, with iterative 

enhancements to its performance. Discussion and Outlook 

Qumus is highly versatile and readily applicable to the vast library of 2D materials beyond those 

demonstrated here. Its integration into an inert -atmosphere glovebox environment is a critical next 

step, as it will enable the autonomous processing of air -sensitive materials, broadening the 

accessible chemical and structural space. We anticipate that Qumus, as an AI experimentalist, will 

act as a significant catalyst, accelerating the pace of discovery in quantum materials, vdW 

nanostructures and devices, in cluding the experimentation on those remaining unexplored due to 

the limitations of manual processes. The primary bottlenecks currently constraining our system are 

instrumental rather than algorithmic. As noted in Fig. 2f , the total time cost is dominated by 

hardware -level latencies, such as mechanical actuation, optical focusing, and thermal equilibration 

times. These constraints will be substantially improved by next -generation hardware optimized for 

high -speed operation s. Concurrently, the rapid evolutio n of AI systems in foundational language 

models, memory -augmented agents, multi -modal sensing and perception will further enhance 

Qumus’s decision -making and self -evolving capabilities. 

Qumus marks the emergence of the first AI quantum experimentalist, providing an unprecedented 

interface for AI to engage directly with the quantum mechanical aspects of our world. Looking 

forward, the architecture demonstrated here serves as a modular blue print for a new class of 

embodied AI experimentalists. We envision this framework being adapted across a wide spectrum 

of scientific instrumentation and laboratories, from material synthesis to advanced 

characterizations 56–60. Ultimately, Qumus could funct ion as a key node within a larger, 

collaborative agentic network, where decentralized AI agents synchronize efforts to accelerate 

large -scale scientific exploration. 

Acknowledgement 

This work is supported by the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) 

program of the National Science Foundation (DMR -2011750) and the Gordon and Betty Moore 

Foundation through Grant GBMF11946. S.W. acknowledges support from AFOSR through 

awards number FA9550 -23 -1-0140 and FA9550 -25 -1-0354, and support from the Princeton 

Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence and the Princeton IP Accelerator Fund. A.Y. is supported by 

U.S. Army Research Office MURI project under grant number W911NF -21 -2-01 47 and 

W911NF261A052 as well as NSF grant DMR -2312311, and NSF grant OMA -2326767. K.W. is 

supported by the Department of Defense (DoD) through the National Defense Science & 

Engineering Graduate (NDSEG) Fellowship Program. D.S. is supported by the NSF Research 

Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program at Princeton University through the NSF MRSEC 

program mentioned. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the CREST (JPMJCR24A5), JST 

and World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Ja pan. 

Author Contributions S.W. conceived and designed the project. L.S. and Y.J. led the development of AI -compatible 

compact hardware, assisted by Z.J.Z. and H. G. Z.J.Z., X.J., L.S., and Y.W. led the development 

of the AI architecture and prompts, assisted by M.Y. and J.S. Y.M., M.S., K.W., D.S., and N.S. 

led the development of computer vision algorithms, assisted by L.S. and Z.J.Z. K. W. and T. T. 

provided hBN crystals. S.W., M.W., and A.Y. co -supervised the project. S.W., Z.JZ., and L.S. 

wrote the paper with input from all autho rs. 

Data Availability 

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 

request. 

Code Availability 

Code developed and used in this work will be available via Github at [link to be provided]. 

References 

1. Krizhevsky, A. et al. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. in 

Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 25 (2012). 

2. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is All you Need. in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30 (2017). 

3. Brown, T. et al. Language Models are Few -Shot Learners. in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst .

33 , 1877 –1901 (2020). 

4. Bubeck, S. et al. Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT -4. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712 (2023). 

5. Wei, J. et al. Chain -of -Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. 

Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35 , 24824 –24837 (2022). 

6. Yao, S. et al. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2210.03629 (2022). 

7. Park, J. S. et al. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. in 

Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and 

Technology 1–22 

8. Schick, T. et al. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. Adv. 

Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 , 68539 –68551 (2023). 

9. Gao, H. et al. A Survey of Self -Evolving Agents: What, When, How, and Where to Evolve 

on the Path to Artificial Super Intelligence. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 

https://openreview.net/forum?id=CTr3bovS5F (2026). 

10. Boiko, D. A. et al. Autonomous chemical research with large language models. Nature 624 ,

570 –578 (2023). 

11. M. Bran, A. et al. Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools. Nat. Mach. 

Intell. 6, 525 –535 (2024). 

12. Shao, E. et al. SciSciGPT: advancing human –AI collaboration in the science of science. Nat. 

Comput. Sci. 6, 301 –315 (2025). 

13. Cong, L. et al. LabOS: The AI -XR Co -Scientist That Sees and Works With Humans. 

Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.14861 (2025). 14. Qu, Y. et al. CRISPR -GPT for agentic automation of gene -editing experiments. Nat. Biomed. 

Eng. 10 , 245 –258 (2025). 

15. Gao, D. et al. Autonomous closed -loop framework for reproducible perovskite solar cells. 

Nature (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -026 -10482 -y

16. Guo, X. et al. Embodied LLM Agents Learn to Cooperate in Organized Teams. IEEE Trans. 

Comput. Soc. Syst. 13 , 2514 –2530 (2026). 

17. Wang, X. et al. Multimodal learning with next -token prediction for large multimodal models. 

Nature 650 , 327 –333 (2026). 

18. From embodied intelligence to physical AI. Nat. Mach. Intell. 8, 491 –492 (2026). 

19. Novoselov, K. S. et al. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science 306 ,

666 –669 (2004). 

20. Novoselov, K. S. et al. Two -dimensional atomic crystals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102 , 10451 –

10453 (2005). 

21. Zhang, Y. et al. Experimental observation of the quantum Hall effect and Berry’s phase in 

graphene. Nature 438 , 201 –204 (2005). 

22. Mounet, N. et al. Two -dimensional materials from high -throughput computational 

exfoliation of experimentally known compounds. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13 , 246 –252 (2018). 

23. Petralanda, U. et al. Two -dimensional Topological Quantum Chemistry and Catalog of 

Topological Materials. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2411.08950 (2024). 

24. Castro Neto, A. H. et al. The electronic properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 , 109 –162 

(2009). 

25. Geim, A. K. et al. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 499 , 419 –425 (2013). 

26. Schaibley, J. R. et al. Valleytronics in 2D materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16055 (2016). 

27. Ajayan, P. et al. Two -dimensional van der Waals materials. Phys. Today 69 , 38 –44 (2016). 

28. Akinwande, D. et al. Graphene and two -dimensional materials for silicon technology. Nature 

573 , 507 –518 (2019). 

29. Andrei, E. Y. et al. The marvels of moiré materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 201 –206 (2021). 

30. Nuckolls, K. P. et al. A microscopic perspective on moiré materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 9,

460 –480 (2024). 

31. Lin, Y. -C. et al. Recent Advances in 2D Material Theory, Synthesis, Properties, and 

Applications. ACS Nano 17 , 9694 –9747 (2023). 

32. Liu, Y. et al. Promises and prospects of two -dimensional transistors. Nature 591 , 43 –53 

(2021). 

33. Das, S. et al. Transistors based on two -dimensional materials for future integrated circuits. 

Nat. Electron. 4, 786 –799 (2021). 

34. Cao, W. et al. The future transistors. Nature 620 , 501 –515 (2023). 

35. Blake, P. et al. Making graphene visible. Appl. Phys. Lett. 91 , 063124 (2007). 

36. Dean, C. R. et al. Boron nitride substrates for high -quality graphene electronics. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 5, 722 –726 (2010). 

37. Zomer, P. J. et al. A transfer technique for high mobility graphene devices on commercially 

available hexagonal boron nitride. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99 , 232104 (2011). 

38. Wang, L. et al. One -Dimensional Electrical Contact to a Two -Dimensional Material. Science 

342 , 614 –617 (2013). 

39. Castellanos -Gomez, A. et al. Deterministic transfer of two -dimensional materials by all -dry 

viscoelastic stamping. 2D Mater. 1, 011002 (2014). 40. Kim, K. et al. van der Waals Heterostructures with High Accuracy Rotational Alignment. 

Nano Lett. 16 , 1989 –1995 (2016). 

41. Pizzocchero, F. et al. The hot pick -up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals 

heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 7, 11894 (2016). 

42. Cao, Y. et al. Quality Heterostructures from Two -Dimensional Crystals Unstable in Air by 

Their Assembly in Inert Atmosphere. Nano Lett. 15 , 4914 –4921 (2015). 

43. Jiang, J. et al. Towards fab -compatible two -dimensional electronics. Nat. Rev. Electr. Eng. 2,

6–8 (2025). 

44. Zheng, X. et al. Electrostatic -repulsion -based transfer of van der Waals materials. Nature 

645 , 906 –914 (2025). 

45. Nolen, C. M. et al. High -Throughput Large -Area Automated Identification and Quality 

Control of Graphene and Few -Layer Graphene Films. ACS Nano 5, 914 –922 (2011). 

46. Li, H. et al. Rapid and Reliable Thickness Identification of Two -Dimensional Nanosheets 

Using Optical Microscopy. ACS Nano 7, 10344 –10353 (2013). 

47. Masubuchi, S. et al. Autonomous robotic searching and assembly of two -dimensional 

crystals to build van der Waals superlattices. Nat. Commun. 9, 1413 (2018). 

48. Han, B. et al. Deep‐Learning‐Enabled Fast Optical Identification and Characterization of 2D 

Materials. Adv. Mater. 32 , 2000953 (2020). 

49. Uslu, J. -L. et al. MaskTerial: A Foundation Model for Automated 2D Material Flake 

Detection. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2412.09333 (2024). 

50. BNL | Quantum Material Press (QPress). https://www.bnl.gov/qpress/ .

51. Yang, F. et al. Autonomous Robotic Mechanical Exfoliation of Two -Dimensional 

Semiconductors Combined with Bayesian Optimization. ACS Nano 19 , 39005 –39013(2025). 

52. Ultralytics. Explore Ultralytics YOLOv8. https://docs.ultralytics.com/models/yolov8/. 

53. Redmon, J. et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real -Time Object Detection. in 2016 IEEE 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 779 –788. 

54. He, K. et al. Mask R -CNN. in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision 

(ICCV) 2980 –2988. 

55. Kirillov, A. et al. Segment Anything. in 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on 

Computer Vision (ICCV) 3992 –4003. 

56. Stach, E. et al. Autonomous experimentation systems for materials development: A 

community perspective. Matter 4, 2702 –2726 (2021). 

57. Jia, Y. et al. Surface -confined two -dimensional mass transport and crystal growth on 

monolayer materials. Nat. Synth. 3, 386 –393 (2023). 

58. Zheng, Z. J. et al. van der Waals Nanochemical Reactors. Nano Lett. 26 , 1920 –1926 (2026). 

59. Gregoire, J. M. et al. Combinatorial synthesis for AI -driven materials discovery. Nat. Synth. 

2, 493 –504 (2023). 

60. Merchant, A. et al. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature 624 , 80 –85 (2023). Fig. 1. Qumus AI architecture and fully robotic minilab. a, Defining characteristics of an AI 

experimentalist. b, Key self -evolving modules of Qumus, including LLM -agents, memory and 

knowledge systems, and skills including instrumental workflows and materials/devices realization 

recipes. c, Qumus architecture for efficient multi -agent collaboration and robust performance. d, 

A compact, fully robotic minilab consisting of vacuum - and temperature -controlled stages for 2D 

material mechanical exfoliation, optic al flake search, flake transfer and stacking, along with 

robotic arms, storage modules, cameras, and microscope systems. Fig. 2. The first AI creation of 2D quantum materials and Qumus personality. a , A

representative organizational response of Qumus and information flow chart, upon receiving a 

user request of a graphene flake. b, A representative plan book initiated by Qumus. c, Computer 

vision for identifying key objects during mechanical exfoliation. d, A series of instrumental 

performance realizing mechanical exfoliation and flake search under the optical microscope. e,

A representative graphene flake created by Qumus. T op: Optical Image; bottom: corresponding 

segmentation. f, An example of total time and its distribution over reasoning, execution and 

observation, for completing the entire process of providing a graphene flake to users. The major 

time is instrumental execution, as expected. The reasoning and observation times may vary 

depending on the chosen LLM. g, Selected radar charts characterizing the different “personalities” 

of Qumus when powered by different LLMs. Fig. 3. Qumus behaves as a closed -loop experimentalist and corrects errors autonomously. a, 

Summary of the performance and workflows of Qumus -Claude -Sonnet -4.6, upon receiving a user 

request. It shows that Qumus can iteratively complete the full process of reasoning, hypothesizing, 

planning, executing, observing, and analyzing to achieve a goal, with each loop testing a new set 

of hypothetical parameters based on observations from previous experiments. No human 

intervention during the entire process. b, Qum us -Gemini -Pro -3’s response to two errors. First, a 

human interruption removed the chip under active processing during an intermediate step, causing 

the workflow to fail. Qumus diagnosed the error and replanned on a new chip. A subsequent LLM 

hallucination incorrectly segmented flakes using the wrong material label. Qumus recognized no 

hBN flake is recorded in the database and succeeded by exfoliation and searching a new chip with 

updated parameters, producing hBN flakes as requested, without human intervent ion or input. Fig. 4. Multi -agent orchestration & autonomous construction of complex devices. a, 

Workflow and information flow chart of Qumus orchestrating agents to complete the user request 

of constructing a graphene transistor device. b, Initial plan book generated by Qumus. c, Optical 

images of graphene and hBN flakes produced by the Processing Agent and stored in the Materials 

Database. d, Design layout created by the Device Expert using the user -provided metal electrodes, 

selected graphene and hBN flakes that meet the transistor device requirement. e, Image showing 

the Processing Agent manipulating the stamp to perform flake transfer using the 2D dry -transfer 

technique. f, Optical image showing the polymer film contacting the substrate (yellow area) and 

picking up the stack, with hBN aligned over graphene according to the design layout in d. g, 

Optical image showing the polymer film placing the stack onto the bottom electrodes, following 

the design layout in d. h, Optical image at 100x magnification of the final stack after dissolving 

top PC layer. i, Schematic illustrating the graphene field -effect transistor. Methods 

Robotic Hardware 

The Qumus hardware system is a compact, fully automated platform for 2D material exfoliation, 

flake identification, transfer, and device fabrication. The hardware consists of a tape -exfoliator 

module implemented based on a 3D -printer arm, three materials s torage tables, two robotic 

handling arms, temperature -controllable stages with vacuum chucks, a motorized optical 

microscope with automated focus control, a multi -axis sample positioning stage, and a multi -axis 

stamp alignment stage. The left side of the w orkstation is used for exfoliation operations, and the 

right side is used for microscope flake search, and transfer/stacking operations for device 

construction. Two overhead cameras monitor the macroscopic workspace and provide visual 

logging for the prese nce and fiducial locations of raw material carriers, silicon chips (classified as 

bare silicon chips, exfoliated chips, and device chips), tapes, and stamps (Extended Data Fig. 2) .

All hardware operations are registered with Qumus through hardware -specific software controllers. 

The controllers include robot -arm, relay, motor, power -supply, sample -stage, transfer -stage, 

microscope, focus, turret, camera and temperature -control interfa ces. These controllers are 

wrapped into fixed executable tools used by the Processing Agent. This setup allows the agents to 

choose among valid operations and parameter ranges, while the deterministic controller layer 

performs the low -level serial, motion, and acquisition commands. 

Agent Prompts and Skills 

Qumus is implemented as a ReAct -style tool -calling LLM -agent system in which a lead agent 

coordinates specialized sub -agents through structured task messages and receives textual or JSON -

like reports. Each agent is initialized with a role -specific prompt d efining its responsibilities, tools, 

constraints, output format, and handoff protocol (Extended Data Fig. 6) . The lead Qumus agent 

serves as the global orchestrator: it interprets user requests, plans steps, delegates tasks, 

incorporates returned observati ons, and revises plans when feedback invalidates earlier 

assumptions. Sub -agents do not communicate freely; information flows through Qumus or shared 

database records, keeping delegation traceable and responsibility explicit. Each specialized agent 

is equi pped with role -specific Skills , where a skill is a reusable capability consisted of tools, 

workflows, and recipes of parameters for processing . These skills range from simple database 

queries to multi -step experimental workflows, including exfoliation reci pes in which parameters 

such as peeling speed, contact force, and temperature etc., are optimized based on the material, 

substrate, and thickness requirements (Extended Data Table 1) .

Communication uses structured templates specifying the task, required data or physical objective, 

constraints, and expected deliverable. Sub -agents return concise reports with observations, records, 

artifacts, execution status, or recommended actions, whic h Qumus converts into later steps or final 

summaries. Safety is enforced through prompt rules and tool restrictions: agents must stay within 

role, avoid and reject unsupported assumptions, and use handoff -ready formats, while database tools are read -only and hardware tools can execute only predefined workflows within specified 

operational limits. 

Role Summaries of Sub -Agents 

(a) Project Manager Agent supports project -level planning based on prior knowledge including 

literature and local experimental history relevant to the requested scientific task. The supporting 

modules for Project Manager include (i) Physics Expert Agent, that provides scientific g uidance 

regarding materials, device concepts, physical constraints, and relevant external or online 

knowledge sources; (ii) Project Database, which stores higher -level project records, project -level 

goals, summaries, and outcomes; (iii) Experiment Database, which stores detailed process -level 

records including workflows, execution histories and outcomes (both successful and failed); and 

(iv) Skill Sets, which are records of optimized workflows and experimental recipes based on prior 

experience. 

(b) Lab Manager Agent evaluates laboratory readiness and resource availability. It determines 

whether suitable flakes, raw materials, and other consumables are available, and verifies whether 

the hardware system is ready to run. It owns supporting modules including (i) Materia ls Database, 

which stores material inventory and flake -level information; (ii) Instrument Status Monitor, which 

checks the status of instruments and system components; and (iii) Computer Vision YOLO 

(Extended Data Fig. 1) , which verifi es tool/material position and availability. 

(c) Device Expert Agent generates device -layout proposals based on the requested device function 

and available candidate materials, determining the stacking order and spatial configuration of 2D 

flakes. It operates through modules including (i) Flake Selector, which selects comp atible flakes 

based on geometric coverage, and (ii) Layout Designer, which determines the rotation and 

translation in of each material (represented as 2D mask) by enforcing geometric constraints such 

as contact, overlap, and exclusion relationships. 

(d) Processing Agent executes hardware workflows to complete requested experimental goals. 

Upon receiving a fabrication or characterization task from Qumus, it determines whether a suitable 

prior workflow already exists, executes that workflow if available, or self -generates a new 

workflow if no suitable prior workflow exists. It is responsible for carrying out mechanical 

exfoliation, flake search, stacking, and related fabrication tasks, and reports execution history, 

selected parameters, and outcomes back to Qumus and databases for future reuse and learning. 

Qumus Personality Characterization 

We characterized model -dependent Qumus behavior across seven dimensions that capture 

reliability, efficiency, bias for action, caution, protocol alignment and reporting quality. For each 

model, metrics were computed from complete autonomous experimental ru ns with identical 

Qumus system prompts and user input (“can you give me a graphene flake?”). The analysis is based on recorded agent traces, tool calls, timing logs and final reports. For each quantitative 

metric, raw values were converted to a normalized five -point score to enable comparison across 

models. The best -performing model for a given metric was assigned a score of 5, and all other 

models were scored relative to that best valu e. Consistency was defined as the fraction of 

successful runs among all attempted 5 runs for each Qumum -LLM system. Agent Efficiency was 

defined as the inverse of the total time spe nt in non -execution agent activity, including reasoning 

and observation. Token Efficiency was defined as the inverse of the total number of input and 

output tokens used during a run. Bias for Action was defined as the fraction of total agent steps 

that inv olved concrete hardware execution or delegation of an executable action. Caution was 

defined as the fraction of total agent steps devoted to reasoning, observation, verification or 

readiness checking before action. Protocol alignment was scored qualitative ly on a five -point scale 

according to how closely the agent’s plan, delegation choices and execution order followed the 

intended protocol specified in the agent prompts. Report quality was also scored qualitatively on 

a five -point scale according to factua l accuracy, completeness, clarity and usefulness of the final 

experimental summary (Extended Data Fig. 4) .

Macroscopic Computer Vision and YOLO Training 

Qumus uses a trained computer -vision module to monitor the macroscopic state of the physical 

lab, localizing chips, tapes, glass slides, stages, stamps, and storage -table fiducials before and after 

robotic actions. Because objects can be placed at arbitrar y in -plane orientations, detection is 

formulated as instance segmentation: each object is returned as a polygon mask, from which 

centroid, size, and in -plane angle are extracted for robotic alignment. QR codes on key objects 

provide robust labels and coord inate anchors in addition to learned class labels (Extended Data 

Fig. 1) .

Model : We fine -tuned Ultralytics YOLOv8 segmentation models from COCO -pretrained 

checkpoints. Training images were collected directly from two overhead RGB cameras, each 

streaming 1920 × 1080 frames at 30 fps, to capture realistic lighting, reflections, and rob ot -arm 

occlusions. Separate datasets were collected for the exfoliation and stacking workspaces, covering 

object classes including silicon chips, scotch -tape crystals, glass -slide QR codes, orange square 

fiducials, exfoliation stages, transfer stages, stamp holders, and table QR codes. After 

augmentation, the exfoliation dataset contained 261 images and the stacking dataset contained 100 

images. 

Training : Models were trained in PyTorch on Apple Silicon using the MPS backend for 30 epochs 

at 1024 × 1024 resolution, batch size 2, SGD with cosine learning -rate decay, a 3 -epoch warm -up, 

and early stopping on validation mAP. 

Deployment and Post Processing : During deployment, each frame is passed through YOLOv8x 

with a confidence threshold of 0.5. Each retained polygon mask is converted into a pose descriptor (x, y, w, h, θ), where (x, y) is the mask centroid, w and h are edge lengths, and θ is the 

short -edge orientation. The angle is wrapped to [−90°, +90°] and sign -flipped to match the right -

handed stage convention. Glass -slide QR detections are paired with orange -square detections using 

relative angle and separation to compute slide orienta tion. Final detections, masks, confidences, 

labels, and pose descriptors are serialized to JSON and written atomically to both rolling latest 

files and per -frame archives for real -time use by the Lab Manager and Processing Agent. 

Microscopic Computer Vision and Segmentation 

Qumus uses an explainable rule -based algorithm to segment and classify nanomaterial flakes 

during flake search. This approach generalizes across materials with limited training data, often 

requiring fewer than five labeled images. The pipeline consists of four steps: LAB conversion, 

Edge Detection, LAB equalization, and Mask Classification (Extended Data Fig. 3) .

LAB conversion : The RGB microscope image is converted to CIE -LAB color space, where 

Euclidean color distances better approximate human -perceived color differences. 

Edge Detection : Edge detection is then performed independently on each LAB channel using 

multiple dilation -erosion kernels with different window radii and iteration counts. Large -radius 

kernels capture low -contrast edges from ultrathin graphene or hBN, while smaller ker nels produce 

sharper edges for higher -contrast flakes and reduce sensitivity to dirt or debris. The resulting edge 

masks are inverted and combined to segment flakes across a wide range of optical contrasts. 

LAB Equalization : Images are then LAB -equalized to correct uneven illumination. The algorithm 

identifies the chip background by comparing large -area masks to a preset standard background 

LAB color. It samples 2000 random background points and interpolates between them to estimate 

the illumination field of a flake -free chip. This field is subtracted from the original LAB image 

and replaced with the standard background color, producing a normalized image with spatially 

uniform lighting. 

Mask Classification : each segmented mask is classified using benchmark LAB points learned 

during training. The average LAB color of each mask is compared to these benchmarks by 

Euclidean distance, assigning labels such as monolayer, bilayer, trilayer, four -or -more layers, bu lk, 

or debris for graphite and transition metal dichalcogenides, and thickness labels for hBN flakes. 

Chip Corner Detection and Flake Re -Localization 

To enable rapid and reliable re -localization of previously identified flakes, we establish a chip -

based coordinate system for each sample. Specifically, the bottom -left corner of the chip is defined 

as the origin, and the position of each flake is recorded as a vector relative to this reference point. 

This representation allows the system to avoid exhaustive re -scan of the entire chip during 

subsequent operations. Instead, the target flake can be directly located by combining the reference corner position with the relative rotation and translation of the chip, enabling efficient and precise 

flake re -finding (Extended Data Fig. 5) .

Chip Corner Detection : The chip is segmented from the background using a combination of 

intensity and color information to ensure robustness under varying imaging conditions. RGB cues 

are used to resolve ambiguities when grayscale contrast is insufficient. After the chip is pl aced on 

the sample stage, live image acquisition starts, coupled with real -time stage jogging movement, 

allowing continuous detection of the chip region. The background image segmentation mask is 

used to extract the chip edge, from whi ch corner candidates are identified based on local geometry. 

The bottom -left corner is used as a reference, and its image coordinates are recorded together with 

a reference optical image of the corner region, enabling reliable matching in subsequent operat ions. 

Flake re -localization : After the chip containing the target flake is placed back onto the sample 

stage, the reference corner is first re -identified using the procedure described above to establish 

the chip’s current position. The detected corner region is then matched to the s tored reference 

image using feature -based registration, from which a planar homography is estimated. The 

homography encodes the relative rotation and translation of the chip between the two observations. 

The rotation angle is extracted from the transformation and used to map the original flake position, 

recorded as a vector relative to the reference corner, into the current coordinate frame. The transfer 

stage is subsequently moved according to the transformed coordinates to bring the t arget flake into 

the field of view. 

Stacking Process 

Flake Alignment : After coarse re -localization, fine alignment is performed to precisely position 

the target flake. A central region from the original reference image (taken at 20x magnification 

from the initial auto -search workflow) is matched to the current field of vie w using normalized 

cross -correlation. To account for in -plane rotation, the reference image is rotated over a range of 

candidate angles, and a coarse -to -fine search is used to determine the optimal alignment. Edge -

based flake segmentation ma sks (instead of optical images) are used to eliminate illumination 

variations. The resulting rotation and translation are used to update the stage position for precise 

flake alignment. 

Contact Detection : Two key steps are involved during stacking: detection of the initial contact 

point between the PC film and the substrate via Newton’s rings, and monitoring of the resulting 

contact area to ensure full coverage of the target flake. As the transfer stage a pproaches in the out -

of -plane direction, images are continuously compared to a reference frame using image 

differencing. The resulting difference image is normalized and a threshold is applied to identify 

regions of intensity changes associated with contac t formation. Connected -component analysis 

with area and shape filtering is used to extract a valid contact region. The first detected region 

indicates the contact point, while the largest region is subsequently tracked to monitor the expansion of the contact area. Its contour is used to verify that the target flake is fully covered with 

a predefined safety margin. This visual feedback is coupled with real -time motion of the transfer 

arm, enabling closed -loop control of autonomous trans fer. 

Digital Map and Flake Matching : A digital map of flakes within the field of view is constructed 

by enhancing the image and extracting flake regions using edge detection, morphological 

operations, and connected -component analysis. The resulting mask defines the spatial distribution 

of f lakes. At selected stages during transfer, the target flake is identified by matching a reference 

mask within the current digital map using template matching with scale and rotation variation. The 

detected position is used to assess the flake state and verify the transfer outcome. 

Device Layout Design 

Device layouts are generated by Design Agent from experimentally acquired flake masks and 

electrode geometries using a flake selector and a layout designer .

Flake Selector : Material and electrode images are first converted into binary masks, with 

electrodes further separated into functional regions. Candidate flakes are then evaluated based on 

geometric compatibility. For example , top encapsulation layers, such as hBN, are selected by 

computationally testing different rotations and translations of candidate flakes to identify the one 

that provides maximum coverage of the target material , and only candidates that sufficiently cover 

the underlying flake are retai ned. Among these, flakes with larger usable area are preferred. 

Layout designer: Device requirements are expressed as geometric constraints between materials 

and electrodes, including contact, overlap, and exclusion relations. The layout is represented as a 

pixel -wise binary map, allowing efficient evaluation of interlayer interactions . Materials are first 

coarsely aligned using centroid matching and principal -axis orientation to establish the required 

contacts. The configuration is then refined by optimizing the rotation and translation of each 

material using a global search (differential evolution) to maximize constraint satisfaction. The 

optimized configuration defines the final device layout and stacking parameters. 

Fabrication Methods 

Raw Material Carrier Preparation: To supply the Qumus robotic lab with two -dimensional 

material crystals for exfoliation, searching, and stacking, we prepared raw -material carriers using 

glass slides. Crystals of 2D materials, including hBN and graphite, were placed on 0.75 -inch -wide 

tape, which was mounted at the center of each glass slide using double -sided tape. Micro -QR codes 

encoding the material type were attached to one side of each glass slide to enable computer -vision -

based identification and mater ial labeling. Orange square markers were attached to the opposite 

side of the glass slide to improve reliability during robotic -arm pickup. 2D Flake Transfer: The transistor devices were assembled using a standard 2D dry transfer method. 

Qumus -produced hBN and graphene flakes were sequentially picked up with a PC/PDMS polymer 

stamp under optical microscope alignment, forming hBN/Graphene/electrodes stacks. The s tacks 

were transferred and placed onto SiO 2/Si wafers with prepatterned Au metal electrode. 

Metal Contacts Preparation: We used electron -beam lithography to define contact regions on 

SiO 2/conductive Si substrate, then we performed cold tank development, reactive ion etching, and 

electron -beam metal deposition to deposit metal contacts. 

Materials, Experiments and Project Databases 

Qumus stores persistent states in three SQLite databases with distinct ownership boundaries. The 

Materials Database records physical inventory, optical images, flakes, chips, stamps, raw -material 

carriers, electrodes and devices. The Project Database recor ds hardware topology, instrument 

status, workflow templates, workflow parameters, workflow runs, step logs and artifacts. The 

Experiment Database records user sessions, agent runs, nested agent calls, reasoning steps, tool 

invocations, tool responses and g enerated artifacts. The database split allows the Lab Manager, 

Processing Agent, Design Agent and Project Manager to share information while preserving clear 

responsibility for each type of state. 

The database tables are relational. Important relationships include flake -to -material, flake -to -

coordinate, flake -to -chip, flake -to -image, electrode -to -chip, device -to -chip, chip -to -slot, chip -to -

corner -image, workflow -run -to -template, workflow -step -to -run , agent -step -to -agent -run and tool -

response -to -tool -call links. These relations allow a final experimental outcome to be traced back 

to the material, chip, image, workflow, agent decision and tool output that produced it. 

UI and Server 

Qumus has a browser -based UI and FastAPI backend that let users control the system, monitor 

agents, view live lab state, inspect databases, review designs, analyze devices, and audit 

experiment history. The homepage is the main control surface. Users send natural -language 

requests to the lead agent, select agents, watch real -time reasoning/tool -call streams, follow 

workflow plans, and stop runs if needed. The backend launches each agent run as an isolated 

subprocess rather than running agents inside the web server. This keeps long -running autonomous 

experiments and hardware -control dependencies separate from the UI server. Agent output is 

streamed to the browser using server -sent events. Structured events are parsed into reasoning logs, 

active -operation upda tes, plan steps, tool calls, delegation events, images, and final responses. The 

UI provides live MJPEG camera streams during robotic operations using the two overhead RGB 

cameras and camera streaming avoids contention with the vision system. 

The Database page exposes capped, read -only views of the materials, processes, and experiments 

SQLite databases, allowing users to inspect lab state without browser -side write access. The Interactive Design page supports user inspection and manual correction of generated stack designs, 

material/electrode masks, device -segmentation outputs. The Settings page controls model 

identifiers, max step limits, verbosity, hardware ports, camera indic es, and API settings, allowing 

the same UI to work with different LLM providers and physical setups. 

Open -Source Software 

Qumus acknowledges the following open -source resources: smolagents, LiteLLM, Ultralytics 

YOLO, PyTorch, OpenCV, NumPy, SciPy scikit -image, BoofCV, PyBoof, SQLite, SQLAlchemy, 

FastAPI, Uvicorn, pySerial, pythonnet and Arduino IDE. 

Supplementary Demo Videos are available at https://qumus.ai Extended Data 

Extended Data Figure 1 | Macroscopic Computer Vision. a, Real camera view of the left -side lab space 

with detected objects, QR -code messages, and oriented bounding boxes overlaid. The left -side view is used 

primarily for exfoliation operations, including the inventory of raw -material carrier, bare silicon chip, and 

exfoliated chips, the status of the scotch tape, and the occupancy of the exfoliation stage. b, Real camera 

view of the right -side lab space. The right -side view is used primarily for search and stacking operations, 

including exfoliated chip, stamp, an d device storage. c, Consolidated digital lab view generated from the 

two camera streams after object detection, QR -code identification and coordinate transformation. Detected 

objects are mapped into a common robot / table coordinate frame and labelled by object type and posi tion, 

providing the Lab Manager Agent and Processing Agent with a shared representation of current workspace 

state for inventory synchronization, readiness verification, and material handling coordinates. Extended Data Figure 2 | Labeled hardware components of the automated exfoliation and transfer 

platform. a, Close -up view of 10 hardware components labeled. b, Assembly view of the hardware 

system Extended Data Figure 3 | Flake Segmentation and Representative Results. a, Workflow of flake 

segmentation and detection, consisting of LAB conversion, edge detection, LAB equalization, and mask 

classification. Each connected region is classified by comparing its mean LAB color to material -specific 

benchmark colors, producing vari ous thickness labels. b, Low -magnification (10x) graphite optical image 

and the segmentation result showing candidate flakes, where colors denote estimated layer number: blue: 

mono layer; green: bilayer; red: trilayer; orange: few -layer; purple: bulk. c, High -magnification (100x) 

optical image to verify and classify the thickness label of candidate flakes identified in (b), using the same 

graphene layer color code as in (b). d, Low -magnification (10x) optical image of hBN and segmentation 

result showing candidate flakes, colors represent estimated thickness: blue: 0 -10nm; green: 10 -20nm; red: 

20 -30nm orange: 30 -40nm; purple: over 40nm. e, High -magnification (100x) optical image to ver ify and 

classify the thickness of candidate flakes identified in (d), using the same hBN layer color code as in (d). Extended Data Figure 4 | Additional Agent Characterization Data. a, Radar plots comparing Qumus 

characteristics across 3 LLM providers (in addition to the models shown in Fig. 2e) using seven behavioral 

metrics: protocol alignment, consistency, agent efficiency, report quality, token efficiency, bias for action 

and cautio n. b, Representative final report generated by Qumus -Claude -Sonnet -4-6. c, Table summarizing 

the five -run averaged total time, total steps, and total tokens (input and output) for every com pleted 

experiment across six LLMs. Qumus prompts and the user request are identical for all runs. Extended Data Figure 5 | Summary of Qumus workflow of creating a graphene transistor device via 

van der Waals stacking. a, Top : image of robotic arm placing the chip containing the target flake onto the 

stage. Bottom: image of robotic arm picking up and placing PC stamp onto stamp holder stage. b, Series of 

optical images and digital masks illustrating chip corner detection and target flake re -localization. A chip 

corner is identified and matched to a reference to determine the relative rotation and positio n. The pre -

recorded flake coordinates are then transformed to relocate the target flake. c, Fine flake alignment. A 20× 

image is matched to a reference image acquired during auto -search to determine the flake position and 

rotation. The stage is then adjusted to achieve precise alignment. d, Optical image (left) and corresponding 

digital map (right) constructed after the PC film is positioned above the flake, enabling localization and 

verification of the target flake. e, Detection of the first contact point between the PC film and the substrate. 

The PC film approaches the substrate until Newton’s r ings appear, indicating contact, followed by 

repositioning of the contact point to the desired location. f, Controlled pick -up of the target flake using the 

PC film. A difference -image mask tracks the expanding contact area, and lift -off is triggered only after the 

flake is fully covered with a safety margin. g, Optical images (10× and 100× magnifications) showing the stack placed onto the metal electrodes after PC melting. h, Optical images and digital masks of graphene, 

hBN, and metal electrodes used by the Design Agent to optimize and generate the final device layout. 

Extended Data Figure 6 | Selected Agent Prompts. a, Code snippet of Qumus Agent prompt 

highlighting its core identity and responsibilities b, Code snippet of Lab Manager Agent prompt c. Code 

snippet of Processing Agent prompt Table 1: Representative Agent Skills 

Extended Data Table 1 | Representative Agent Skills. Representative workflow skills, tool -level skills 

and reusable recipe skills available to the Qumus multi -agent system. Each entry lists the responsible agent, 

the user or system trigger, the tools invoked, and the operational requirements.