Title: Tytan: Interactive Neurosymbolic Construction of Analytic Semantic Schemas from Relational Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06331v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 01:17:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Tytan: Interactive Neurosymbolic Construction of Analytic Semantic Schemas from Relational Data 

Donna Hooshmand Shubham Shahi Cameron Barrie Abhratanu Dutta Marko Sterbentz Harper Pack Kristian J. Hammond 

Northwestern University 

Abstract 

From natural-language query interfaces to au-tomated report generation, data analysis tools need a description of the data: the real-world entities it contains, which columns function as measures or identifiers, and how tables con-nect into units of analysis. Today, this seman-tic layer is usually written by hand. This is a knowledge-acquisition bottleneck that limits the scalability of analytic systems, keeps non-technical users dependent on experts, and is it-self error-prone. We present T YTAN , a system for automatically constructing an analytic se-mantic schema from a relational database and, when available, a short user-provided descrip-tion. T YTAN combines symbolic analysis of the database with LLM-based semantic infer-ence for entity proposal, role assignment, and naming. When the evidence leaves a decision ambiguous, T YTAN asks the user a targeted natural-language question. We evaluate T YTAN on eight databases span-ning real-world and benchmark domains along the three axes that define a schema’s functional utility: (i) coverage , are all important enti-ties and features captured?; (ii) retrieval cor-rectness , do the schema’s instructions actually reach the data?; and (iii) characterization accu-racy , are semantic types correct? Across the seven reference domains, T YTAN 

reaches every entity, attribute, and aggre-gable feature of the expert-corrected reference schemas (100% coverage). Additionally, 100% of its retrieval instructions execute correctly (1,678 of 1,678 self-generated claims), and se-mantic roles agree with the reference on 92-100% of matched attributes. Checking the un-derlying data showed the small disagreement is in the reference, not in T YTAN . On a held-out blind test (a live, ten-table database with no declared keys), T YTAN recovers the full entity structure with verified keys and satisfies 100% of the satisfiable expectations of five indepen-dent blind annotators. 

1 Introduction 

Organizations often place a semantic layer between raw databases and the people or systems that use them. Instead of describing data only through ta-bles, columns, and foreign keys, this layer rep-resents the data in terms of real-world entities, attributes, and relationships (Chen, 1976; Chen et al., 2012). This intermediate layer is what allows a business-intelligence tool to interpret a request such as “average fire size per state” or a natural language interface to translate “which professors taught the most classes?” into appropriate joins and aggregations. Without this context, query sys-tems would need to infer meaning directly from the schema, which is often ambiguous. As a result, LLM-based agents can misinterpret tables and rela-tionships, and production natural-language-to-SQL systems remain unreliable on real-world databases that do not provide enough semantic information to resolve user intent (Floratou et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024). Despite its importance, this semantic layer is usu-ally built by hand. Building a conceptual schema requires expertise in both the database’s physi-cal structure and the domain the data represents. This is the classic “knowledge-acquisition bottle-neck” of ontology engineering (K¨ uc ¸ ¨ uk McGinty et al., 2019). Additionally, this process is difficult to scale across the many datasets an organization may maintain, and manually written schemas can quickly fall out of date as the underlying database changes. It also leaves data consumers (who of-ten lack database knowledge) dependent on more technical workers for routine data inquiry and anal-ysis. This paper introduces T YTAN , a system that is designed to address this challenge by automati-cally constructing a high-level semantic represen-tation of a relational dataset with minimal manual effort. Given a relational database and an optional description of the dataset, T YTAN produces an an-arXiv:2608.06331v1 [cs.DB] 6 Aug 2026 alytic semantic schema we refer to as a ring . This schema is a structured, self-constrained JSON ar-tifact that identifies (i) the entities described by the data, (ii) each entity’s attributes along with an analytic role (identifier, categorical, metric, or datetime). (iii) join paths connecting entities, (iv) linguistic surface forms (human-friendly names, descriptions grounded in real values, and label tem-plates) that let downstream systems talk about the data and do analytical operations on the data. Rings 

adopt the format of the S ATYRN analytics platform (Sterbentz et al., 2024), but the representation is system-agnostic. It’s a semantic data catalog that any schema-aware tool can use. Limitations of symbolic and neural methods make the automatic construction of schemas chal-lenging. Symbolic techniques, like key discovery and statistical type detection can recover structural properties of a database but can’t reliably infer what those properties mean or the semantic impor-tance of them. They may identify a column’s data type or detect a candidate primary key, but they cannot determine that household income should be treated as an aggregable field while zip code 

is Categorical. They may also fail to recognize that a table containing student, course, and grade information represents a junction table rather than a standalone entity. LLMs are capable of making such semantic inferences, but they might halluci-nate columns, invent joins between unrelated tables, and are not always consistent across multi-step con-struction. The central design on T YTAN leverages the strengths of each method, while creating safe-guards to eliminate the limitations. Every LLM pro-posal is validated against the database: name-and-type matching for column mappings, value-overlap for detecting joins, uniqueness for detecting keys, sample-value evidence for detecting types. Addi-tionally, properties that can be computed directly from the database are handled through determin-istic procedures. If the available evidence is still insufficient, T YTAN asks the user a focused natural-language question and uses the response to update the schema (Figure 1). This human-in-the-loop paradigm improves robustness and transparency, positioning T YTAN as a general-purpose system for automated semantic modeling, unlike prior work that focuses narrowly on the type detection or static schema recovery. We make the following contributions: • We define analytic schema construction as the task of constructing a semantic representation from the database instance. This representa-tion must support analytical query planning and validation, as well as natural-language descriptions of query results. • We present T YTAN , an interactive neurosym-bolic pipeline for analytic schema construc-tion. We describe how it validates LLM-generated inferences against the database by validating proposed joins with deterministic checks, using uniqueness for testing entity keys, and using sample values for refining type assignments without replacing semantic judgments. When the available evidence is not enough to resolve a decision, it triggers an interactive clarification to handle uncertain-ties. • We define a functional evaluation framework that measures whether a generated schema can support the tasks it’s meant to serve. The evaluation covers entity and feature coverage against expert-corrected references; the accu-racy of its semantic type; and retrieval cor-rectness,by validating claims that the schema makes against the source database. • We evaluate T YTAN on eight databases, in-cluding seven reference domains and one held-out test. We report results across all three evaluation dimensions and test the generated schemas in an end-to-end analytics platform. 

2 Related Work 

Conceptual modeling and schema recovery. 

Deriving conceptual models from other artifacts is a long-standing goal (Chen, 1976; Batini et al., 1986; Yu and Jagadish, 2006; Kellou-Menouer et al., 2022). Earlier work generated entity-relationship diagrams from controlled natural-language requirements using syntactic patterns and hand-built lexicons (Chen, 1983). these methods worked within small, domain-specific datasets with limited vocabulary but did not generalize well be-yond them. Some reverse-engineering tools such as SchemaSpy 1 visualize the structure declared in a database schema, but their practicality heavily depends on primary- and foreign-key constraints. However, such constraints are often missing from  

> 1https://schemaspy.org TYTAN
> DB instance
> User input
> (optional)
> Structural profiling
> keys, samples, cardinalities, nulls
> LLM semantic inference
> entities, roles, names, joins
> Grounding & verification
> value-overlap probes, verified keys, guards
> Clarification loop
> targeted questions, conservative defaults iterative sweep: unclaimed tables/columns User
> Ring
> semantic layer
> analytics & report generation (S ATYRN )natural-language query interfaces Business Intelligence (BI) tools / semantic layers
> every proposal validated against the instance

Figure 1: TYTAN overview. A database instance and an optional one-sentence description enter the pipeline. Symbolic profiling, LLM proposals, and deterministic verification interleave to produce a ring : a self-contained semantic catalog (an example of a ring is given in Figure 2). Decisions the evidence cannot settle go to the user as clarification questions. 

real-world databases (D¨ ohmen et al., 2024). Such tools surface what the schema already states; they cannot infer what it omits. A table’s meaning, an at-tribute’s role, an undeclared relationship, all remain out of reach. More recent work uses LLMs to gener-ate conceptual schemas from textual specifications (Prokop et al., 2024; Divljan and Brdjanin, 2025). These methods operate on descriptions rather than instances, so they can’t directly check whether the generated tables, attributes, or relationships are supported by the data. Other recent work infers conceptual models over heterogeneous tabular data from column names and sampled values (Wu et al., 2025). This is the closest work to ours, and it does its job well: it recovers conceptual structure across many heterogeneous tables to help users find and understand relevant datasets. Our goal is different. We construct a schema a downstream system can compute over, not one for dataset discovery. That is why T YTAN adds what analysis requires and their setting does not: entity keys, analytic roles, and column-level join paths checked against the data. The construction of the schema is also fully automated, with no way to incorporate user feed-back, and the evaluation measures how closely the schema’s structure matches a reference rather than what a user can do with it. T YTAN is designed for a different use case and creates the complementary artifact: it constructs a schema that can be used directly by downstream analytic systems, checks its structural claims against the database, and asks the user to resolve decisions that remain ambigu-ous. Thus, we evaluate the schema in terms of the analytic tasks it can support, rather than structural similarity alone. (§5). 

Semantic type detection and table understand-ing. A related body of work is focused on assign-ing semantic types to individual columns (Venetis et al., 2011). Sherlock learns column-type clas-sifiers from large collections of tables (Hulsebos et al., 2019). Sato extends this idea by using rela-tionships between columns as part of the prediction process (Zhang et al., 2020). TURL supports both column annotation and relation extraction (Deng et al., 2020), while Doduo uses fine-tuned language models to identify column types (Suhara et al., 2022). More recent approaches use LLMs to la-bel columns with little or no task-specific training (Korini and Bizer, 2023; Feuer et al., 2024). This reflects the broader use of foundation models for data-wrangling tasks (Narayan et al., 2022; Kayali et al., 2024). Column type detection addresses an important part of schema construction, but only at the level of individual attributes, usually within a single table. It does not determine which tables rep-resent entities or how those entities are connected. In T YTAN , column typing is one step in a broader process. Type assignments are determined by the LLM’s interpretation of the column, as well as de-terministic evidence from the values stored in the database (§4.4). 

Key and join discovery. a long-standing database problem has been discovering keys and inclusion dependencies that are not explicitly de-clared in the schema (Rahm and Bernstein, 2001; Rostin et al., 2009; Papenbrock et al., 2015; Jiang and Naumann, 2020). In practice, exhaustive de-pendency discovery is both costly and prone to false positives. Two columns may appear related simply because they contain overlapping ranges of small integer identifiers, even when no meaning-ful relationship exists between them (Zhang et al., 2010). Rather than trying to recover every pos-sible dependency, T YTAN builds a conservative relationship graph intended for analytic use. De-clared constraints are accepted directly. A join that is not declared is included only when it passes several checks, including value overlap, key-role and specificity tests, and an LLM-based plausibil-ity assessment above a strict confidence threshold (§4.3). 

Natural-language interfaces to data. Text-to-SQL research has produced increasingly capable systems and widely used benchmarks (Yu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2023). Even so, deploying these systems on real databases remains difficult. One recurring problem is that table defini-tions alone often do not provide enough context to resolve what a user means or how a query should be constructed (Floratou et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024). In practice, organizations address this gap by adding semantic layers or other forms of manually written database documentation. 2 TY- 

> TAN

focuses on creating this missing context. It derives a semantic schema from the database itself and asks for user input only when the available evidence does not resolve an ambiguity. 

Analytics-augmented generation. SATYRN 

(Sterbentz et al., 2023, 2024) produces factual analytic reports by planning symbolic analyses over a manually annotated ring schema and passing the resulting facts to an LLM. Its published evaluation relied on expert-written rings for eight domains, illustrating the manual annotation burden that motivates this work. We use S ATYRN to evaluate T YTAN in a downstream setting (§5.9), although the schemas produced by T YTAN are not tied to S ATYRN .

3 Problem: Analytic Schema Construction 

3.1 What the schema must contain 

An analytic system needs a schema to have an ana-lytical structure, which describes both how the data can be used; and a linguistic surface, which shows how it should be presented (Sterbentz et al., 2024). It must identify the main units of analysis, spec-ify which operations are valid for each attribute, and record the join paths needed for questions that span multiple entities. It must also provide read-able names and descriptions so that results can be expressed in natural language rather than with raw column names such as patient id .

> 2See, for example, IBM’s semantic-layer guidance ( https: //www.ibm.com/think/topics/semantic-layer ) and TigerData’s proposal for self-describing databases ( https: //www.tigerdata.com/blog/the-database-new-user-l lms-need-a-different-database ).

The ring format captures both (Figure 2). A ring contains: • Entities: Real-world concept (e.g., Wildfire ,

Patient ) that maps to a source table, and declares an id : a column or column set that uniquely identifies different instances. • Attributes: Each attribute carries provenance (source table and columns), a physical stor-age type ( isa ∈ { string, integer, float, date, datetime, boolean }), an analytic role ( type ): 

Categorical , Datetime , or Numeric – plus an additional Metric tag for attributes that rep-resent a measurement of the corresponding entity, a human-friendly name, and a descrip-tion grounded in example values drawn from the data. The storage type and the analytic role are deliberately independent: an insurance ID stored as an integer but would have a Categori-cal type; averaging out a set of IDs produces a meaningless number so numerical operations should not be applied such attributes. • Relationships: A global list of verified join paths, plus per-entity aggregable attributes :attributes of related entities reachable through those joins, annotated with the path and its direction (many-to-one or one-to-many). On a many-to-one path the related attribute acts like one of the entity’s own columns. On a one-to-many path, questions about it only make sense with aggregation. • Surface forms: Entity and attribute names, and a reference template per entity: a short la-bel built from one or two identifying attributes (e.g., ’’ {FirstName } {LastName }’’ ) used when results mention individual instances. What the ring excludes is also deliberate. It records the available data, where it comes from, how records are identified, and which analytic op-erations each attribute supports. The downstream system is responsible for carrying out those op-erations. For example, a match date labeled as 

Datetime can be grouped by year, month, or season even if the database contains no separate columns for those values. Counts, rankings, and standings are likewise results of analysis rather than attributes of the schema. Including these derived values in the ring would duplicate work. Schema-aware sys-tem can perform these operations when needed and data source                    

> type: postgres connection: <url> joins: rent rate.region id →
> region information.region id (m:1)
> entity: RegionInformation (table
> region information )
> id: [region id] isa: integer (verified unique)
> reference: ‘‘ {RegionName },{StateName }’’
> attributes (one of four, expanded)
> SizeRank: source: {table: region information, columns: [size rank] }
> isa: integer type: [Numeric, Metric] nicename: ‘‘Size Ranking’’ description: ‘‘...rank by size. e.g. 1, 2, 3’’
> aggregable attributes (reachable via joins)
> AverageRent ←rent rate.average rent joins: [rent rate.region id →...] type: [Numeric, Metric] “avg rent per region”
> entity: RentRate (table rent rate )
> id: [region id, date] isa: string
> (no declared key — composite verified against the data)
> ...
> retrieval instructions unit of analysis + label analytic role + surface forms cross-entity reachability verified identity

Figure 2: Anatomy of a generated ring (housing-rent database, abridged). The right-hand annotations mark what each block is for : data source.joins and per-attribute source blocks are executable retrieval instruc-tions; each entity’s verified id and reference make it a unit of analysis with a human-readable label; isa /type 

license analytic operations; and aggregable attributes expose related entities’ features through validated join paths. RentRate illustrates the no-declared-key case: its composite id was verified unique against the data. 

would tie the schema to the features of a particu-lar user. This distinction also affects evaluation. A question is supported when the necessary data can be reached through the ring and the relevant operations are correctly specified, not only when the schema contains a column whose name closely matches the question (§5.5). 

3.2 Problem statement 

Given a database instance D, including its tables, columns, declared constraints, and stored values, along with an optional natural-language description 

d, the goal is to construct a ring R with three prop-erties: (i) Semantically relevant tables and columns in D should be represented or reachable in R (ii) The contents of R must agree with the database and should not be hallucinations: referenced ta-bles,columns and proposed joins must exist in the database. (iii) R should support as broad a range of valid analytic questions as possible for use of a downstream schema-aware system. The construc-tion process may inspect the database directly and ask the user a small number of focused questions when the available evidence is not enough to pre-vent ambiguities. The second requirement is espe-cially important. A schema may appear reasonable while still containing a join between unrelated ta-bles or assigning a non-unique column as an entity key. These errors may not be obvious from the schema itself, but they can invalidate any down-stream analysis that depends on them. We there-fore treat such errors as primary failure cases in the evaluation (§5.8), and much of T YTAN ’s design is devoted to detecting and preventing them. 

4 The T YTAN System 

TYTAN operates in three interleaved phases: (i) 

symbolic analysis of the database, (ii) LLM-driven semantic inference over structural evidence to pro-pose a conceptual schema, and (iii) interactive clar-ification with the user to handle uncertainties. This section follows the pipeline (Figure 1) stage by stage. The pipeline starts with deterministic sym-bolic profiling; after that, every stage follows the same pattern: LLM proposes, and the deterministic rules verify. 

4.1 Structural profiling and Symbolic analysis 

TYTAN begins by collecting deterministic infor-mation from the database: its tables and columns, any declared primary or foreign keys, samples of distinct column values, cardinalities, and null rates. TYTAN also accepts flat files such as CSV and Ex-cel. These types of files are loaded into a relational store so that the same machinery applies but unlike a managed database, there are no primary keys, no foreign keys, and often no reliable column types. In this setting the metadata sources above are simply empty, and profiling can only supply value-based evidence. Every key must be verified for unique-ness against the data, every join must be discovered through value overlap, and column types must be inferred from samples (§4.3, §4.4). Our evalua-tion includes settings where no such metadata is available (§5). 

4.2 Entity proposal and grounding 

Using an optional the database description and the extracted evidence, the LLM first proposes a small set of domain entities and their likely attributes. For example, it may infer that a dataset describes wild-fires and that each wildfire has a location, cause, and size. The next stage connects these concepts to the database. Each proposed entity is matched to a source table, and each attribute is matched to one or more columns using column names, data types, and sample values. The resulting mappings are then checked and cleaned up deterministically. When two proposed entities map to the same table, they are merged rather than allowed to overwrite one another. The entity name may also be revised when the source table makes the row-level meaning clearer. For ex-ample, a proposed entity named “ Location ” may be renamed Wildfire if the matched table contains one row per wildfire incident. After the initial mappings are complete, T YTAN 

examines the tables and columns that remain unas-signed. Each unmapped table is placed into one of four categories. An entity represents a real-world instance and the main unit of analysis. A link ta-ble records a many-to-many relationship between entities. A passthrough table is a small lookup or conversion table, such as a grade-conversion chart or status-code table, whose values should remain accessible through joins even though the table is not itself a unit of analysis. The ignore category is reserved for technical tables such as migration logs. The classifier avoids using ignore unless there is clear evidence that a table has no analytic value, reducing the chance that useful lookup data will be discarded. Finally, any unmapped columns in an already assigned table are added to the corre-sponding entity as attributes. This final pass helps ensure that the generated ring covers the database rather than only the fields selected during the initial proposal stage. 

4.3 Join discovery and validation 

When a foreign key is declared in the database, T Y- 

> TAN

uses it directly. The difficult case is when the database does not contain any metadata or relation-ships as constraints. To recover these missing joins, TYTAN combines two sources of candidates: rela-tionships proposed by the LLM, especially when interpreting link tables, and relationships suggested by column names and overlapping values. Every undeclared candidate then passes through the fol-lowing checks: 1. Value-overlap. A candidate join whose columns share no values cannot connect any rows and is removed. The check uses all dis-tinct values rather than a sample, so zero over-lap is enough to rule the join out. We apply this check even when the join was proposed confidently by the LLM. 2. Deterministic key-role guards. Several kinds of column pairs are excluded before LLM verification. A source column that is it-self a primary key, declared or inferred, is not treated as a foreign key, since overlap between two key columns often comes from unrelated small-integer ranges. Columns classified as Numeric measures are also excluded, because foreign keys act as identifiers, while counts such as goals or saves (in soccer) may happen to overlap with sequential IDs. A column that already has a verified reference is not assigned a second referent. Finally, if a column’s val-ues overlap the keys of three or more different tables, all of its candidates are dropped: the overlap is more likely to reflect a generic value range than a specific relationship. This count is computed over all overlapping targets be-fore any other filter is applied, so the guard cannot be undercut by earlier skips. 3. LLM verification. After the checks above, the remaining candidate joins are checked for semantic plausibility using the two columns’ names, types, and sample values. For example, the model must decide whether 

Student.Major → Department.DNO (depart-ment code) represents a real reference, or whether columns such as physician.code 

and medication.code merely contain values from overlapping ID ranges. A candidate is accepted only when the model assigns confi-dence above a fixed threshold. If verification fails, the join is dropped. The resulting graph contains declared foreign keys and undeclared joins that have passed both data-based and semantic checks. TYTAN then searches this graph to determine which attributes of related entities are reachable from each entity. It distinguishes attributes reached through a di-rect many-to-one relationship from those reached through reverse or multi-hop paths. Related entity identifiers are exposed as countable targets, while unhelpful paths, such as a route back to the source entity’s own key, are removed. Each edge in the graph is a join and also keeps a canonical direction. This direction is used when the join is serialized rather than relying on the endpoint order returned by the graph library. Two additional steps address cases that would otherwise leave the join graph incomplete. First, entities introduced during the iterative coverage sweep are assigned an identifier that other tables can reference. If the LLM did not identify a key, TYTAN uses declared metadata when available or selects an id-like column whose values are verified to be unique. Without this step, the entity would be absent from the key map and could not receive incoming relationships. Second, TYTAN preserves multiple for-eign keys between the same pair of ta-bles. Both matches.home team id and 

matches.away team id , for example, may reference teams , and TYTAN keeps them as separate joins rather than letting one replace the other. When computing aggregable attributes, however, it currently traverses only one of them; extending path search to use all parallel joins is left to future work. 

4.4 Typing: storage, role, and evidence 

TYTAN distinguishes a column’s storage type from its analytic role. The storage type describes how the values are represented in the database. The analytic role describes how the column should be used by downstream analytic systems. Storage type can usually be determined from metadata and observed values, while analytic role requires some interpretation of what the values mean. When the LLM proposes an attribute, it also as-signs an initial analytic role. Later passes compare this assignment with the database evidence. Two rules guide this process: • Evidence may refine, but not override, se-mantics. If the model assigns a Numeric role and the sampled values are numeric, T YTAN 

may refine the storage type from string to integer or float. However, a column is not assigned a Numeric role simply because its values contain digits. Zip codes, department codes, and phone numbers are still categorical values and should not be aggregated. Con-versely, the system corrects assignments that clearly conflict with the data. For example, a Numeric role over non-numeric values (course hours recorded as “10:30–12”) downgrades to a Categorical type. The same applies when a column is labeled Datetime by the LLM because of its name but contains no tempo-ral values. For example, a column named 

time period whose values include “After-noon Classes” is treated as Categorical. De-clared date and time types are handled dif-ferently because explicit database metadata is stronger evidence than a limited sample of values. For example, a date column stored as 20080424 samples as plain integers; the declared DATE type settles what the values alone cannot. • Computable facts are computed directly from the database. The declared column type (the database’s own metadata) settles the storage type when it is present. An identi-fier the LLM guessed as a string is recorded as an integer when the database declares it one, and a Numeric attribute declared INTE-GER is kept an integer rather than widened to a float. These corrections apply to storage only; the analytic role assigned by the LLM is never changed here, so an integer-stored zip code stays Categorical and no numeric oper-ation is licensed on it. Because dynamically typed databases can hold values that contra-dict their declarations, every declaration is checked against the observed values before it is trusted. Date and time columns are detected from de-clared metadata when available. If such infor-mation is not available, it’s identified through value patterns. Their granularity is preserved, so values such as 2008-04-24 10:00 are recorded as timestamps rather than dates. Boolean values are normalized, and columns with identifier-like names are checked for common mistakes, such as treating a phone number as a measure. Attribute descriptions may include values sampled directly from the database. The LLM is not allowed to invent these examples. Finally, T YTAN verifies each entity’s identifier. Entity identifiers are verified separately because it’s too consequential: every count, join, and group-by downstream depends on it. A declared primary key is accepted as the entity key. When the LLM pro-poses a key for a table without a declared primary key, T YTAN checks whether the values are unique. A plausible name is not enough. For example, 

player name may appear to identify a player while still containing several duplicate names. When no declared or proposed key can be verified, T YTAN 

searches for other candidates. It considers individ-ual columns from both the entity attributes and the original table, since identifier columns used only in joins may not appear as attributes. Columns with id-like names are checked first, while Numeric mea-sures are excluded. T YTAN also considers declared foreign-key columns and, for fact tables, likely composite identifiers such as a combination of di-mension keys and a date. Each candidate is tested against the database, and a key is accepted only if it uniquely identifies the rows. Heuristic choices are used only when no candidate can be verified. This verification ensures that an entity key actually identifies individual rows. It also helps determine whether a table should be represented as an entity at all. If no declared or inferred key uniquely iden-tifies the rows of a junction table, T YTAN leaves it as a relationship rather than promoting it to an entity. 

4.5 Naming and surface forms 

After entity and attribute detection, the LLM gen-erates machine-readable names, human-readable labels, and reference templates. TYTAN then checks and cleans up these outputs. Abbrevia-tions are expanded. For example, cont date be-comes “Containment Date.” Additionally, when a proposed label does not match the values in the column, the system derives a new one from the data. For example, a column labeled “CustomerDetails ” whose values are customer names is renamed “ CustomerName .” Attributes brought in through joins are also given shorter names, such as “ ClaimFilingDate ” instead of “PolicyIDClaimDateClaimMade .” Any duplicate names are resolved using deterministic rules. Ref-erence templates are checked separately. A ref-erence is the short human-readable label used when a result mentions a specific row, and it is distinct from the entity identifier. For example, 

CustomerID is what uniquely identifies a customer, but {CustomerName } is how we would reference that entity in a sentence. Each placeholder in an entity’s reference template must correspond to one of the entity’s attributes. If a template is missing or invalid (for example, the model omits it, or its placeholder names an attribute that was renamed or dropped during assembly) T YTAN falls back to the entity identifier, so every entity instance will always be given a valid label. 

4.6 Uncertainty and the clarification loop 

Not every decision can be resolved from the database alone. Some depend on the user and the kind of questions they want to ask. An en-rollment table, for example, might be treated as its own entity or as a junction between students and courses. If the user wants to ask about enrollments themselves (“How many enrollments were dropped this semester?”), the table should become an entity, with attributes like grade and enrollment date of its own. If the user only wants to reason about students and courses (“Which course has the most students?”), the same table is better treated as a junction, a link between two entities. It supplies the join path, and its columns surface as aggregable attributes on the entities it connects. TYTAN identifies cases like this and asks a fo-cused question when the evidence is not enough. A question might be about a table’s role, about a column an attribute could map to, or about a type the values leave unclear. The system might ask, for example: “Is course instructor a standalone entity, or a junction table connecting courses to in-structors?” The answer goes back through the same pipeline and the same checks. If a table is reclassi-fied, T YTAN rebuilds that part of the schema, adds the relevant columns, assigns their types, and up-dates the joins. Sometimes an answer surfaces a new ambiguity, and the system asks a follow-up. Once everything is resolved, the final ring is assem-bled. The user may also skip the questions entirely. Each one has a default answer, so the pipeline can complete without any user input. 

5 Evaluation 

A good schema should be able to model real world entities and relationships, while conveying the se-mantics to help in querying the dataset. Two schemas will be different in what they model, but will remain the same functionally. We divide the evaluation into 3 key capabilities and test T YTAN 

generated schema against the following Research Questions (RQ): • RQ1 (Coverage): Does the generated schema capture the relevant entities and attributes in the dataset? • RQ2 (Retrieval Correctness): Are the map-pings/sources to the tables, columns and join paths in the generated schema reachable and correct? • RQ3 (Characterization Accuracy): Are the attributes and entities aligned semantically to the analyses that can be performed on them? For example, can a given attribute really be grouped, averaged or filtered according to the assigned attribute type? These questions define what we want to test against, independent of how each is measured .Coverage is scored against expectations annotated outside the system: reference schemas written by domain-literate experts and frozen before genera-tion (§5.2, §5.5); Retrieval Correctness is scored against the live database by executing the ring in-structions (§5.3); and Characterization Accuracy is scored against the same references (§5.4). Acommon audit instrument operationalizes all three (§5.8). A note about the scope: we do not evaluate the correctness of the downstream analyses. That is covered by the analytics system S ATYRN (Ster-bentz et al., 2024). T YTAN ’s contract ends with section §3.1. We evaluate whether the joins run in the correct direction, whether the column map-pings are correct and relevant, the accuracy of the characterization, and the overall semantic meaning of the dataset. 

5.1 Datasets and ground truth 

We evaluate on 8 relational databases, summarized in Table 7 (full descriptions and sources in Ap-pendix A). Seven of the eight datasets have an expert-corrected reference schema. For these, we an-notated the schema ourselves, learning the data through queries and deciding what the schema should look like. Four are real-world domains: wildfire incidents, school shootings, housing rents, and regional income. The other three come from the Spider text-to-SQL benchmark (Yu et al., 2018), chosen for their multi-table join structure. In addition, we chose a live FIFA World Cup 2026 dataset with 10 CSV files and no declared primary or foreign keys. This serves as a fully blind generalization test: the expectation suite (§5.2) was annotated and frozen before T YTAN ever ran on it. Because the source updates daily, we pin a snapshot for our experiments. Results appear in the Blind Generalization section (§5.5). The real-world domain datasets come from the S ATYRN evaluation, whose schemas were manually-annotated. The ground-truth rings are the expert-corrected versions: script-derived, then reviewed by hand, verifying each mapping and run-ning queries against the data. We treat these rings as a directive to which entities, attributes, and re-lationships matter, and we resolve any structural disagreements we find between the dataset and the generated schema. Some of these surfaced during the audit, for example SSN got misclassified as Numeric instead of being an Identifier type. 

5.2 RQ1: Coverage: Entity and feature 

We measure coverage against two independent ex-pectations. First, we check if entities and attributes that are referenced in the ring are reachable or not and then we identify if any relevant entity, fea-ture or relationship was missed. The second is harder, because it depends on semantic judgment suggested by an LLM and is easier to overlook. • Reference Coverage : Every entity, attribute, aggregable attribute, and relationship in the ground-truth ring should have a counterpart in the T YTAN ring. We match on the underlying column and relationship mappings rather than the names, so a match confirms that both rings point to the same data even when they label it differently. • Independent expectation suite : We use this specification on what entities and attributes should be contained in a good schema, anno-tated from the data description alone (§5.5). No table name, column name, or any refer-ence to the schema was given in the descrip-tion. The suite has 5 independent annotators, two human, domain-literate annotators and a panel of three LLMs (Claude Opus and Son-net via an agentic CLI in one-shot mode from an empty directory, and gpt-5.5 via the Codex CLI; exact versions recorded in the frozen in-puts). The human annotators were not given access to the dataset or the schema. For the blind FIFA test, one expectation list (the entities, attributes, and relationships a correct schema would contain) was annotated and frozen before generation, the second list is generated after the first run and is recorded with weaker attested blind status, this dis-tinction is preserved in the frozen artifacts. The LLM annotators were blind by construction, but share a potential bias. Tytan’s own generator is an LLM reading the same description, and one of the panel LLMs belong to the same model fam-ily. So LLM annotated lists partly measure the inter-model convergence. We therefore treat the human list as ground truth. Then we report the Domain Ent. Attrs Aggr.                      

> college 3 4/4 40/40 60/60 insurance policies 5/5 42/42 24/24 hospital 10/10 60/60 169/169 income disparity 1/1 14/14 —zillow 2/2 7/7 2/2 school shooting 4/4 126/126 19/19 wildfire 1/1 16/16 —
> Table 1: RQ1 reference coverage: every reference entity, attribute, and aggregable is reachable in the generated ring (provenance-matched, join-equivalence closure).

per-annotator recall alongside the panel consensus (≥2 of 3) (Panickssery et al., 2024). The results are scored as the following: • satisfied - ring matches semantically with the human adjusted spot checks • missed - present in the database but missed in the ring • unsatisfiable - not in the data at all; excluded from the recall denominator and are reported separately since it is measured against the dataset rather than the system. Across all seven reference domains, TYTAN 

reaches every entity, attribute, and aggregable at-tribute in the reference ring, with no misses (Ta-ble 1). The eighth database (FIFA WC2026) has no expert reference ring. Its coverage is measured against the independent blind expectation suite and reported separately (§5.5). 

5.3 RQ2: Self-generated retrieval tests 

A ring is operationally a set of instructions, defining the mappings of the entities to tables, column to attributes, and join paths to relationships. The Retrieval Correctness tests these instructions by executing them. For each ring we self-generate 

a test suite which includes: • For each entity, sample instances by the de-clared ID and confirm the id is non-null and unique over all rows. • For each attribute, retrieve its value using the suggested mapping in the ring and test the de-clared table and columns exist and are reach-able. • For each aggregable attribute, traverse through the suggested join path and verify if the re-trieval is successful and the resulting rows correspond to the underlying relationships                   

> Domain Claims Pass
> college 3 325 100% insurance policies 145 100% hospital 854 100% income disparity 16 100% zillow 19 100% school shooting 290 100% wildfire 38 100% FIFA WC2026 (blind) 2,071 100%
> Table 2: RQ2 self-generated retrieval tests: every claim the ring makes (ID uniqueness, attribute mapping, join-chain execution, reference resolution) executed against the live database.

• For every reference template, render the labels for the sampled instances, and verify if they are semantically correct. The tests are structured to scale with the ring and are independent of how detailed the annotations for a database are. Every claim made in the ring is tested directly with the database. The (Table 2) shows the results for each database against each claim made in the ring and the percentage of how many were actually found in the database. The test suite included four test classes: • Identifier uniqueness: non null and distinct over all rows, • Attribute mapping: declared tables and columns exist and are reachable, • Join executability: every attribute join path connects correctly and executes, and • Reference resolution: declared labels resolve to an attribute, including the engine synthe-sized IDs. The suite also catches key-selection errors that coverage misses. In one case, T YTAN defaulted to an arbitrary column when no real key was found. In another, it keyed an entity on a name column with duplicate values, because its computational time budget ran out on measure columns before it reached a real key candidate. The identifier unique-ness test (§4.4) flagged both against the live data, and each is handled by general, deterministic logic (an identifiability guard, and better ordering of key candidates) rather than data-specific patches. Because these tests are generated from T YTAN ’s own output, they cannot catch omissions, that’s Domain Roles isa (family)               

> college 3 93.9% 98.0% insurance policies 100% 100% hospital 94.7% 100% income disparity 100% 100% zillow 100% 100% school shooting 100% 100% wildfire 100% 100%
> Table 3: RQ3 Characterization accuracy on the mapped attributes in the ring vs the database. There were 21 miscategorized attributes found, where identifier type numerics were found as summable metrics instead of categorical

why we do a coverage evaluation on entities. Re-trieval Correctness checks that everything the ring 

claims is executable and truthful. 

5.4 RQ3: Characterization accuracy 

Downstream analysis decisions rely on semantic roles. For example, a consumer can average a Nu-meric attribute, group by a Categorical attribute and build a time series on a Datetime attribute. We measure the accuracy of the categorization of these attributes against the ground truth rings, matching the mappings for the attributes using two criteria: role agreement (on types of Attribute, Numeric, Categorical, Numeric, Datetime) and storage-type agreement (declared column types, value samples) with disagreements against the instance evidence. Table 3 reports the results for the Characterization Accuracy test. It found two misclassified attributes in the first round, (declared integer in the database but were datetime) but were semantically corrected after the checks and verified at 100%. 

5.5 Blind generalization test 

We used the FIFA World Cup 2026 dataset for held-out blind test: a live dataset with ten tables, downloaded as CSVs with no declared primary or foreign keys. The expectation suite (§5.2) was annotated and committed before T YTAN saw it. The first run was executed fully autonomously with no clarification answers. In this run, the entities ( Teams , Players , Matches , Venues ,

Referees , and Tournament Stages ) matched the core of all the four frozen expectation lists. T YTAN 

was able to infer the correct identifier for all the entities despite the absence of any declared keys in the dataset. But it also failed in two instructive ways: three spurious joins passed LLM verification (goal/save counts whose small-integer ranges overlap sequen-tial ids), and it also missed three foreign keys. These false joins are the more telling failure: the LLM approved them itself, which is why join val-idation cannot rest on the model alone. The keys went undiscovered as the entities created by the iterative sweep were invisible as reference targets and a second foreign key between an already con-nected table was dropped. Since these failures were held-out rather than cherry-picked, their diagnosis is the evidence for the method. Each resolution is deterministic and dataset independent, and can be regression-tested. We then ran the fixed pipeline again, still with no clarification answers. It gave us 7 entities, with verified keys, 19 joins and a 100% retrieval test pass rate over 2,071 self-generated claims (Table 2). The frozen expectation by the second annota-tor aligns with a failure from the first run. In this data, a match in the matches table involves two teams, a home side and an away side, and has two columns referencing the same Teams table as foreign keys. The annotator’s frozen expectation list for the match entity, independently expected TeamA and TeamB as attributes, i.e. it demanded the two-references-to-one-table structure that T Y- 

> TAN

initially missed. The annotator arriving at this requirement, based only on the dataset descrip-tion and no schema shows that handling this struc-ture correctly is genuinely a part of what a correct schema needs. The final rings, scored against all the frozen ex-pectation lists (Table 4) yield 100% recall over all the satisfiable items that the annotators had in their expectation list. The unsatisfiable items were those that did not exist in the dataset and there were 41 of these. We do not consider this as the system failure but gaps in the data itself. We de-signed the evaluation to separate these concerns. Similarly, all three LLMs in the annotator panel, expected a “Tournament” entity which did not exist in the dataset. Judgments were produced by an LLM judge (Zheng et al., 2023) (pinned gpt-5.5 ), where each citation was validated against the ring and the dataset and then is rechecked by a human. The rechecked items, 108 in total, included, ev-ery unsatisfiable item, judgment calls, both cases where the judges disagreed with consensus and a 20% sample of satisfied verdicts. The human-adjudiction overturned 13 of the LLM judges’ verdicts, and every one was in the same direction: the judge had excluded the item as Annotator Ent. Feat. Rel. Unsat.                                

> Claude Opus 6/6 41/41 8/8 4Codex ( gpt-5.5 )8/8 59/59 12/12 16 Claude Sonnet 10/10 49/49 10/10 14 Human #1 (pre-gen.) 4/4 14/14 2/2 4Human #2 (att.-blind) 3/3 12/12 3/3 3Panel consensus 7/7 44/44 10/10 7
> Table 4: Blind expectation-suite recall on FIFA WC2026, after human adjudication: satisfied / satis-fiable items per class (entities, features, relationships), plus unsatisfiable items (absent from the data; excluded from the denominator). Recall is 100% for every anno-tator and the ≥2-of-3 panel consensus; no expectation item present in the database was missed.

unsatisfiable for the data did not exist. But on re-check it was found that it was deliverable based on one consistent rule: the data is in the database, and the question can be answered through the schema then the item is delivered, counting and aggregation come under the analytics’s engine scope. 

The paradigm case: The annotators expected “tournament year” and “start/ end dates”, but no such exact columns exist. But the schema deliv-ered Match.Date as datetime and year filtering, calendar rollups, start/end dates are derivations the user computes. The schema’s obligation is to de-liver the correct date type (§3.1). The judge thus marked these as unsatisfiable and the human cor-rected them. The rings scored here were generated fully autonomously and without any clarification answers. Table 4 reports recall after this human review of the judge’s scores. 

5.6 Cross-run stability 

Nondeterminism in LLMs is a legitimate concern. A tool that produces a different schema every time it is run would be hard to trust. T YTAN , however, is insulated from this by dint of its architecture: 1) the fixed vocabulary of the semantic layer (e.g., entity, attribute, join, etc.) constrain the LLM gen-eration; 2) the deliberate inclusion of the human in the loop ensures the schema remains recognizably consistent with the data. We nonetheless evaluate nondeterminism in T Y- 

> TAN

with three fully-autonomous runs on the 4 multi-table domain datasets (hospital, college, school shootings, FIFA) on identical inputs and code. We compare on these on the structural deci-sions that matter, joins and entities that were iden-tified, which keys were inferred and how columns were characterized. We claim that the grounding architecture makes these decisions deterministic and is checked against the actual dataset. Our results show that the join sets agree on every pair of run in every domain (Jaccard 1.0), including the FIFA dataset where ev-ery join needs to be inferred. The entity IDs are identical across all runs (25/25 entity-table pairs), as are entity sets, with a single exception where one run treated grade-conversion chart as an en-tity while others treated it as a lookup. Crucially, this is “information-equivalent” – either way, the same data is accessible through the schema. It is a labeling choice not a functional difference. Shape and identifiability guards make these structural decisions deterministic across fully au-tonomous runs. Residual variance is now confined to semantic typing of the few columns found in the datasets (pairwise role agreement 94–100%), e.g. a building-floor-number, ages, elevation-column, cases where the judgment calls vary as the data alone does not settle the answer. 

5.7 Metadata ablation 

The blind test’s clean results on FIFA WC-2026, with zero metadata (no declared primary keys, for-eign keys, or column types) raises a natural ques-tion: how much do declared constraints actually contribute? We test this directly on the Spider datasets (insurance, college, hospital), building its degraded twin, by stripping away their metadata. We produced a CSV-equivalent copy with identi-cal tables and rows and values and then ran T Y- 

> TAN

on both versions (original and the metadata-stripped), with identical code, fully autonomously, making sure metadata is the only variable. The original database’s declared foreign keys serve as the ground truth for joins, but T YTAN now need to rediscover them from the values alone for the metadata-stripped dataset (Table 5). Results: • Core Structure survives metadata loss: The structure is metadata-robust and stays intact: entity sets, attribute coverage, veri-fied keys (identical on 18 of 19 shared entity tables) and analytic roles remain unchanged. The insurance database’s stripped run repro-duces the metadata run’s join graph exactly. • Joins are where the metadata matters: 

Joins are where metadata has benefits, and the driver is how much the identifier value ranges overlap . Value-only discovery works Domain Arm FK rec. Spur. RQ2                      

> insurance (4) meta 4/4 0145/145 stripped 4/4 0138/138 college (9) meta 9/9 0331/331 stripped 8/9 0403/403 hospital (25) meta 25/25 0854/854 stripped 13/25 4589/590

Table 5: Metadata ablation: FK recovery(against the database’s constraints), spurious joins and self gener-ated tests with meta data stripped (“stripped”) vs intact (“meta”). Entity coverage and attributes are covered at 100%, ids and analytic roles are mostly unchanged for both “meta” and “stripped”(92%-100%); The col-lege counts exclude the two genuinely undeclared refer-ences both arms discover. The single RQ2 failure is the composite-key fallback discussed in the text. 

near-perfectly where identifiers are distinct: insurance recovered 4/4 foreign keys, col-lege 8/9. On the otherhand, in the hospital dataset, a dozen overlapping small integer code spaces drops the recovery to 13/25 and four coincidental-overlap joins leak past the guards, which are tuned to catch ranges over-lapping three or more key spaces. So we see metadata isn’t needed for structure but is valu-able for joins when the identifier values are ambiguous. • Failure caught by self-generated tests: With no declared foreign key to suggest composite-key candidates, one entity resorted to an unverified fallback id, which was flagged by the Retrieval Correctness tests. Storage-hint agreement drops by design rather than by error, as all the columns in the metadata-stripped datasets are declared as TEXT, but the semantic roles are held at 92-100% throughout. 

5.8 Supporting instrument: artifact-grounded audit 

Alongside the scored tests above, we ran a second defect audit as an extra check. Each ring is checked against the same deterministic ground-truth arti-fact used throughout: tables, columns, declared keys, value samples, cardinalities, and null rates, all pulled directly from the database. The artifact uses no LLM judgment, and every issue the audit flags must point to evidence in it, not to the live database or the model’s memory. To limit single-model bias, three models audit each ring on their own and a fourth checks the merged report. Findings follow a fixed defect taxonomy (Table 6) whose codes map onto the three research questions: D2/D5 to coverage, D1/D3/D6/D7 to retrieval, and D4/D9 to characterization, with D0/D8 non-functional. The full rubric, severity levels, and anti-pattern exam-ples are in Appendix C.                       

> Code Defect class RQ
> D0 Structural validity —D1 Join fidelity (missing/spurious) RQ2 D2 Entity coverage RQ1 D3 Primary-key correctness RQ2 D4 Attribute type correctness RQ3 D5 Attribute coverage RQ1 D6 Reference-template validity RQ2 D7 Aggregable correctness RQ2 D8 Redundancy (non-functional) —D9 Internal consistency RQ3

Table 6: Audit defect taxonomy and its mapping onto the functional research questions. Each finding carries a severity (critical / major / minor) and must cite artifact evidence. 

5.9 Downstream Demonstration 

SATYRN is a platform for analytics-augmented gen-eration that operates on the entities and attributes specified in the rings T YTAN produces. Analytics within S ATYRN are defined at the ring level and operate on specific entities and their attributes. The analytics engine of S ATYRN will then execute these analytics and produce the necessary SQL queries against the underlying database. These method of carrying out analytics has been used to create a nat-ural language notebook in which users can search for and select questions to answer in a turn-by-turn manner (Paley et al., 2021), generate high-quality training data for improving the text-to-SQL capa-bilities of large language models via reinforcement learning (Sterbentz et al., 2026), and answer ques-tions with reports that provide contextualizing in-formation for a user’s question (Sterbentz et al., 2024). For this last application, we demonstrate the gen-erated schema end-to-end: S ATYRN , loaded with the T YTAN rings school shooting and wildfire, an-swers analytic questions over the live databases (Figure 3). We emphasize that this demonstration validates integration and not analysis quality. The analytic correctness is the consuming system’s eval-uation not the schema’s. What are the top five cities in Illinois by school shoot-ings? The top five cities in Illinois by school shootings are as follows: 1. Chicago - 63 incidents 2. Rockford - 6 incidents 3. Champaign - 4 incidents 4. Springfield - 3 incidents 5. Peoria - 3 incidents Chicago has significantly more incidents than the other cities listed. How many fires were there in Illinois in 2020? In 2020, Illinois experienced a total of 125 wildfires. 

Figure 3: Example end-to-end system interaction 

6 Discussion 

Deterministic grounding. Most errors we en-countered during development occurred when an LLM output was accepted without enough support from the database. Some example failures include: the model proposing joins because two columns had similar names, including example values that were not present in the data, inferring types from column names alone, and selecting keys without checking whether they were unique. Better and more strict prompts did not reliably prevent these errors. Instead, we moved verifiable decisions out of the LLM: values, uniqueness, and column over-lap are computed directly, while the model is used for semantic judgments that require domain knowl-edge. Those judgments are then checked against the database before they are added to the schema. This separation between computed facts and model-based interpretation, together with the defect tax-onomy used to audit the output, may also be useful in other LLM-based data-engineering systems. 

Results. The results support two conclusions. First, removing the declared metadata had little effect on the entities, attributes, keys, and roles produced by the system. This suggests that the approach can work with raw CSV exports as well as curated relational databases. Second, Join dis-covery was more sensitive to missing metadata. When several identifier columns contained heavily overlapping value ranges, the data alone could not always distinguish a real relationship from a coin-cidental match. In these cases, T YTAN will refer to user input or declared constraints to settle them. 

7 Conclusion 

In this paper we presented T YTAN , an interac-tive neurosymbolic system designed for construct-ing analytic semantic schemas from relational databases. The system combines LLM-based in-terpretation with deterministic checks against the database instance and asks the user to resolve cases that cannot be settled from the data alone. Its out-put is a self-contained semantic schema that can be used by downstream analytic tools. We also introduced an audit methodology for evaluating generated schemas and tested whether the result-ing schemas support downstream analysis. Across eight databases, including a blind test with no de-clared keys, the generated schemas covered every feature in the expert-corrected references and suc-cessfully executed all 3,758 self-generated retrieval tests against the source data. They also satisfied all satisfiable expectations written by five independent blind evaluators. These results suggest that check-ing model-generated decisions against the database can make automated semantic schema construction substantially more reliable. 

Limitations 

TYTAN was developed for relational and tabular data. It can process hierarchical formats such as JSON or event logs only after they have been flat-tened, which may discard some of their original structure. Graph-shaped sources such as knowl-edge graphs are outside the current scope of the system. They already represent entities and re-lationships explicitly rather than through tables, columns, and joins, and therefore require a different approach to schema discovery (Kellou-Menouer et al., 2022). Join discovery is intentionally con-servative, which means T YTAN may miss real re-lationships when the two sides use different rep-resentations. For example, one table may store a numeric identifier while another stores the corre-sponding name. Additionally, the value-overlap checks assume that T YTAN can inspect the full database. When only a sample is available, or ac-cess to the data is limited, finding no shared values does not rule out a relationship confidently. In such cases, checks that rely on overlap become less re-liable. The metadata ablation evaluation in (§5.7) shows where join recovery begins to break down. It remains strong when identifier spaces are easy to distinguish, but becomes less reliable when many columns use overlapping small-integer values. Re-moving metadata also increases construction cost by roughly a factor of five. Large schemas also increase the number of candidate joins that require LLM verification and may therefore raise both run-time and cost. Composite-key discovery uses de-clared foreign keys to generate candidate combina-tions, so it is less effective when those declarations are missing. The clarification loop assumes that the user un-derstands the domain, although no database exper-tise is required. When no user is available, the system applies default AI-suggested answers. We evaluate the overall performance of this unattended setting but do not measure the quality of each de-fault separately. Because a human is part of the pipeline, the clarification component deserves its own evaluation, which we acknowledge is part of future work. Finally, the expert reference schemas were written for the same downstream system used in our extrinsic evaluation, S ATYRN . Although the ring contains the kinds of information commonly required by semantic-layer systems, its usefulness for other consumers has not yet been tested directly. 

Acknowledgments 

We would like to thank the Center for Advancing the Safety of Machine Intelligence (CASMI) for funding this work. 

References 

Carlo Batini, Maurizio Lenzerini, and Shamkant B Na-vathe. 1986. A comparative analysis of methodolo-gies for database schema integration. ACM Comput-ing Surveys (CSUR) , 18(4):323–364. Hsinchun Chen, Roger HL Chiang, and Veda C Storey. 2012. Business intelligence and analytics: From big data to big impact. MIS Quarterly , 36(4):1165–1188. Peter Pin-Shan Chen. 1976. The entity-relationship model—toward a unified view of data. ACM Trans-actions on Database Systems (TODS) , 1(1):9–36. Peter Pin-Shan Chen. 1983. English sentence struc-ture and entity-relationship diagrams. Information Sciences , 29(2–3):127–149. Xiang Deng, Huan Sun, Alyssa Lees, You Wu, and Cong Yu. 2020. TURL: Table understanding through representation learning. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 14(3):307–319. Predrag Divljan and Drazen Brdjanin. 2025. Towards an LLM-based tool for automated database design. In 

Companion Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2025): Posters & Demos , volume 4099 of CEUR Workshop Proceedings , pages 343–347. Till D¨ ohmen, Radu Geacu, Madelon Hulsebos, and Se-bastian Schelter. 2024. SchemaPile: A large collec-tion of relational database schemas. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data , 2(3). Benjamin Feuer, Yurong Liu, Chinmay Hegde, and Ju-liana Freire. 2024. ArcheType: A novel framework for open-source column type annotation using large language models. Proceedings of the VLDB Endow-ment , 17(9):2279–2292. Avrilia Floratou, Fotis Psallidas, Fuheng Zhao, Shaleen Deep, Gunther Hagleither, Wangda Tan, Joyce Ca-hoon, Rana Alotaibi, Jordan Henkel, Abhik Singla, et al. 2024. NL2SQL is a solved problem... not! In 

Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR) .Han Fu, Chang Liu, Bin Wu, Feifei Li, Jian Tan, and Jianling Sun. 2023. CatSQL: Towards real world natural language to SQL applications. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 16(6):1534–1547. Madelon Hulsebos, Kevin Hu, Michiel Bakker, Emanuel Zgraggen, Arvind Satyanarayan, Tim Kraska, C¸ a˘ gatay Demiralp, and C´ esar Hidalgo. 2019. Sher-lock: A deep learning approach to semantic data type detection. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 1500–1508. Lan Jiang and Felix Naumann. 2020. Holistic primary key and foreign key detection. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems , 54:439–461. Moe Kayali, Anton Lykov, Ilias Fountalis, Nikolaos Vasiloglou, Dan Olteanu, and Dan Suciu. 2024. CHORUS: Foundation models for unified data dis-covery and exploration. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 17(8):2104–2114. Kenza Kellou-Menouer, Nikolaos Kardoulakis, Georgia Troullinou, Zoubida Kedad, Dimitris Plexousakis, and Haridimos Kondylakis. 2022. A survey on semantic schema discovery. The VLDB Journal ,31(4):675–710. Hyeonji Kim, Byeong-Hoon So, Wook-Shin Han, and Hongrae Lee. 2020. Natural language to SQL: Where are we today? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,13(10):1737–1750. Keti Korini and Christian Bizer. 2023. Column type annotation using ChatGPT. In Joint Workshops at the 49th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDBW’23): Tabular Data Analysis Work-shop (TaDA) , volume 3462 of CEUR Workshop Pro-ceedings .Hande K¨ uc ¸ ¨ uk McGinty, Ubbo Visser, and Stephan Sch¨ urer. 2019. How to develop a drug target on-tology: KNowledge Acquisition and Representation Methodology (KNARM). In Bioinformatics and Drug Discovery , volume 1939 of Methods in Molec-ular Biology , pages 49–69. Springer New York. Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, Chengliang Chai, Guoliang Li, and Nan Tang. 2024. The dawn of natural language to SQL: Are we fully ready? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 17(11):3318–3331. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, Xuanhe Zhou, Chenhao Ma, Guo-liang Li, Kevin Chang, Fei Huang, Reynold Cheng, and Yongbin Li. 2023. Can LLM already serve as a database interface? A BIg bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-SQLs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Avanika Narayan, Ines Chami, Laurel Orr, and Christo-pher R´ e. 2022. Can foundation models wrangle your data? Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,16(4):738–746. Andrew Paley, Andong L Li Zhao, Harper Pack, Sergio Servantez, Rachel F Adler, Marko Sterbentz, Adam Pah, David Schwartz, Cameron Barrie, Alexander Einarsson, and Kristian J. Hammond. 2021. From data to information: automating data science to ex-plore the us court system. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial In-telligence and Law , pages 119–128. Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. LLM evaluators recognize and favor their own generations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37. Thorsten Papenbrock, Sebastian Kruse, Jorge-Arnulfo Quian´ e-Ruiz, and Felix Naumann. 2015. Divide & conquer-based inclusion dependency discovery. Pro-ceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 8(7):774–785. Dominik Prokop, ˇ Stˇ ep´ an Stenchl´ ak, Petr ˇ Skoda, Jakub Kl´ ımek, and Martin Neˇ cask´ y. 2024. Enhancing do-main modeling with pre-trained large language mod-els: An automated assistant for domain modelers. In 

Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2024) , volume 15238 of 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 235–253. Springer. Erhard Rahm and Philip A Bernstein. 2001. A survey of approaches to automatic schema matching. The VLDB Journal , 10(4):334–350. Alexandra Rostin, Oliver Albrecht, Jana Bauckmann, Felix Naumann, and Ulf Leser. 2009. A machine learning approach to foreign key discovery. In 12th International Workshop on the Web and Databases (WebDB) .Karen C. Short. 2022. Spatial wildfire occur-rence data for the United States, 1992–2020 [FPA FOD 20221014], 6th edition. Forest Service Research Data Archive, Fort Collins, CO. https: //doi.org/10.2737/RDS-2013-0009.6 .Marko Sterbentz, Cameron Barrie, Donna Hooshmand, Shubham Shahi, Abhratanu Dutta, Harper Pack, An-dong Li Zhao, Andrew Paley, Alexander Einarsson, and Kristian Hammond. 2023. Lightweight knowl-edge representations for automating data analysis. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12848 .Marko Sterbentz, Cameron Barrie, Shubham Shahi, Abhratanu Dutta, Donna Hooshmand, Harper Pack, and Kristian J Hammond. 2024. SATYRN: A plat-form for analytics augmented generation. In Proceed-ings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 6360–6385. Marko Sterbentz, Kevin Cushing, Cameron Barrie, and Kristian J Hammond. 2026. Ringsql: Generating synthetic data with schema-independent templates for text-to-sql reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.05451 .Yoshihiko Suhara, Jinfeng Li, Yuliang Li, Dan Zhang, C¸ a˘ gatay Demiralp, Chen Chen, and Wang-Chiew Tan. 2022. Annotating columns with pre-trained lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Inter-national Conference on Management of Data (SIG-MOD) , pages 1493–1503. U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2022. Personal income in cook county, il. https://fred.stlouis fed.org/series/PI17031 .U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2023. Unemployed persons in cook county, il. https://fred.stlouis fed.org/series/LAUCN170310000000004A .U.S. Census Bureau. 2022a. Estimate of median house-hold income for cook county, il. https://fred.s tlouisfed.org/series/MHIIL17031A052NCEN .U.S. Census Bureau. 2022b. Estimate of people age 0-17 in poverty in cook county, il. https://fred.s tlouisfed.org/series/PEU18IL17031A647NCEN .U.S. Census Bureau. 2022c. Estimate of people of all ages in poverty in cook county, il. https://fred.s tlouisfed.org/series/PEAAIL17031A647NCEN .Petros Venetis, Alon Halevy, Jayant Madhavan, Marius Pasca, Warren Shen, Fei Wu, Gengxin Miao, and Chung Wu. 2011. Recovering semantics of tables on the web. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,4(9):528–538. Zhenyu Wu, Jiaoyan Chen, and Norman W Paton. 2025. Conceptual schema inference for tabular datasets using large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04632 .Cong Yu and HV Jagadish. 2006. Schema summa-rization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB) , pages 319–330. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingn-ing Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic pars-ing and text-to-SQL task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3911–3921. Dan Zhang, Yoshihiko Suhara, Jinfeng Li, Madelon Hulsebos, C ¸ a˘ gatay Demiralp, and Wang-Chiew Tan. 2020. Sato: Contextual semantic type detection in tables. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,13(12):1835–1848. Meihui Zhang, Marios Hadjieleftheriou, Beng Chin Ooi, Cecilia M Procopiuc, and Divesh Srivastava. 2010. On multi-column foreign key discovery. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 3(1):805–814. Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 36. Zillow Group, Inc. 2023. Housing data - zillow research. 

> https://www.zillow.com/research/data/ .

A Datasets 

Table 7 summarizes the eight datasets used in our evaluation. Four represent real-world analytic do-mains for which the original rings were written by hand. We also include three databases from the Spi-der text-to-SQL benchmark (Yu et al., 2018). They were selected because they contain non-trivial rela-tionships across multiple tables. The final database was reserved for the blind evaluation. 

Wildfire Occurrence The Wildfire Dataset is an extensive collection of data which contains records for 2.3 million georeferenced wildfires in the United States from 1992 through 2020, rep-resenting approximately 180 million acres burned (Short, 2022). We host the database in PostgreSQL. 

School Shooting Incidents The K-12 School Shooting Database, 3, originally developed at The Center for Homeland Defense and Security, covers incidents at U.S. schools from 1970 through June 2022. It includes any incident in which a gun was brandished or fired, or a bullet struck school prop-erty, whether or not anyone was injured or killed. 

> 3https://k12ssdb.org

Zillow Observed Rent Index The Zillow Ob-served Rent Index 4 is a rental price index designed to accurately represent the entire rental housing market, rather than just the properties currently listed for rent. This index averages the rents rents in the 40th–60th percentile of each region’s hous-ing stock (Zillow Group, Inc., 2023). 

Income Disparity This database contains in-formation about the earnings of residents of spe-cific geographic locations, such as counties or metropolitan areas (U.S. Bureau of Economic Anal-ysis, 2022; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2023; U.S. Census Bureau, 2022b,a,c). 

Spider databases We use three databases from the Spider text-to-SQL benchmark: college, hospi-tal, and insurance (Yu et al., 2018). 

FIFA World Cup 2026 (blind) The blind-test database is a live, relationally normalized FIFA World Cup 2026 dataset with ten tables and no declared primary or foreign keys of any kind. The source updates daily. 

B Ring Format Reference 

Figure 4 shows a shortened ring for the housing-rent domain: two entities built over two tables, connected by one validated join. A ring is a single JSON document with three sections. The metadata section (purple) carries the ring’s id ( rid ), its name, and a generated one-line descrip-tion of the ring. The data source section (pink) records how to reach the data: the connection type, the tables, and the global joins list. Each join names its two tables, its two columns, and the column type. Every join in this list was validated against the instance (§4.3). There is no separate relationships section: cross-entity structure lives in this joins list and in the per-attribute join paths below. The data abstraction section (blue) lists the en-tities found in the dataset. Each entity includes a verified id , which may be a composite of more than one column, along with a singular name , and a 

reference template of at most two {Attribute }

placeholders. Each entity’s attributes include columns from the entity’s own table and fields reached through forward many-to-one joins. It’s 

aggregable attributes include fields reachable through reverse or multi-hop relationships, together with the full join path needed to query them. Each attribute records a human-readable name , its physi-

> 4https://www.zillow.com/research/data/

Domain Dataset Description 

Environmental sus-tainability Wildfire Occurrence 2.3M geo-referenced U.S. wildfire records, 1992–2020 (Short, 2022). Public safety School Shooting Inci-dents K-12 school shooting incidents, 1970–June 2022. Urban housing Zillow Rent Index Regional rent-index time series; the fact table declares no key. Socioeconomic Income Disparity BEA personal income by county and metro area, with BLS and Census series. Education College (Spider) Students, courses, an enrollment junction, and a grade-conversion lookup; 9 declared FKs (Yu et al., 2018). Healthcare Hospital (Spider) 25 declared FKs; overlapping small-integer code ranges (the ablation stress case). Insurance Insurance policies (Spi-der) Five entity tables; 4 declared FKs. Sports (blind) FIFA World Cup 2026 Live ten-table dataset with zero declared keys. 

Table 7: The eight evaluation databases: seven with expert-corrected reference schemas (four real-world domains and three Spider databases) and one held-out blind test.                           

> name: Zillow Rent Rates description: <generated one-line summary> rid: <stable id>
> Data Source
> type: sqlite connection: <path or url>
> tables
> region information (key: region id) rent rate (no declared key)
> joins (validated by value overlap) rent rate.region id →
> region information.region id (integer, m:1)
> Data Abstraction (ontology.entities)
> entity: RegionInformation (table region information )
> id: [region id] isa: integer (verified unique)
> reference: ‘‘ {RegionName },{StateName }’’ attributes: SizeRank: isa: integer type: [Numeric, Metric] source: {table: region information, columns: [size rank] }
> StateName: isa: string type: [Categorical] ... aggregable attributes: AverageRent: type: [Numeric, Metric] joins: [rent rate.region id →region information.region id]
> entity: RentRate (table rent rate) id: [region id, date] isa: string
> (no declared key — composite verified against the data)
> reference: ‘‘ {RegionName }’’ attributes: AverageRent: isa: float type: [Numeric, Metric] source: {table: rent rate, columns: [average rent] }
> RegionSizeRank: isa: integer type: [Numeric, Metric] source: {table: region information, columns: [size rank], joins: [rent rate.region id →region information.region id] }
> ...

Figure 4: A snippet ring generated by T YTAN for the housing-rent domain, shown in the three-section presentation style used for the expert-annotated rings of Sterbentz et al. (2024): ring metadata (purple), data source and validated joins (pink), and the data abstraction layer (blue). Every element shown (keys, joins, types, labels) was generated and verified automatically. RentRate’s composite key was verified against the data to be unique against since the table did not have any declared keys. 

cal storage type in isa (string, integer, float, date, datetime, timestamp, or boolean), and its analytic role in type (Identifier, Categorical, Numeric, Met-ric, or Datetime). It also includes a short descrip-tion of the attribute along with values sampled from the database and the source column from which it was derived. The Zillow Rent Rate’s ring (shown in Figure 4) would be stored in a JSON file as: 

{"name": "RentRate", "id": {"isa": "string", "source": {"table": "rent_rate", "columns": ["region_id","date"]}}, "reference": "{RegionName}", "attributes": { "AverageRent": {"isa": "float", "type": ["Numeric","Metric"], "source": {"table": "rent_rate", "columns": ["average_rent"], "joins": []}}, "RegionSizeRank": {"isa": "integer", "type": ["Numeric","Metric"], "source": {"table": "region_information", "columns": ["size_rank"], "joins": ["rent_rate.region_id-> region_information.region_id"]}}, ...}} 

The original ring format required manual anno-tating (Sterbentz et al., 2023). An expert specified the entities, attributes, and joins in a pre-annotated CSV file, which was then converted into the JSON format used by Satyrn (Sterbentz et al., 2024). In-teractive ring construction was left for future work. By contrast, the ring shown in Figure 4 was gener-ated from a database connection string and a one-sentence description. Before producing the final ring, T YTAN checked the proposed keys, joins, and analytic roles against the database. C Audit Rubric 

The audit rubric checks each ring only against the deterministic database artifact. The auditor does not access the live database or add values that are not contained in the artifact. Defect classes:     

> D0 Structural sanity (required fields; stop on failure) D1 Join fidelity (declared FKs present; no spurious joins) D2 Entity coverage (every substantive table reach-able) D3 Primary-key correctness (ids unique and non-null) D4 Attribute type correctness (isa vs. declared type and samples) D5 Attribute coverage (no substantive column dropped) D6 Reference-template validity (placeholders re-solve) D7 Aggregable correctness (join paths well-formed) D8 Redundancy (cosmetic duplicates) D9 Internal consistency (cross-field contradictions)

Each defect is then categorized into one of the following three severity classes: critical (breaks retrieval or misleads analysis), minor (degrades quality), cosmetic .Two rules were added while applying the rubric following typing rules mentioned in §4.4. The first specifies cases that should not be treated as errors. These include categorical columns stored as integers, date and time granularity supported by the sampled values, and undeclared joins whose value overlap has already been verified. The second rule handles joins that appear plausible from their column names. In an early audit, the reviewer ac-cepted one such join even though the two columns had no values in common. The auditor must also confirm value overlap in the ground-truth artifact of the database before accepting an undeclared re-lationship. 

D Clarification Question Types 

Each clarification question is stored as a structured object that includes a deterministic identifier. This allows for the same inputs produce the same ques-tion and previous answers can be reused safely. This object also contains the question text, the model’s suggested answer and confidence score, and the context needed to apply the user’s response without relying on session state. There are four categories of clarifying questions: • table mapping : asks which table corresponds to a proposed entity. The answer updates the entity’s source table and rebuilds its attribute mappings. • column mapping : asks which column(s) cor-respond to a proposed attribute. The answer rewrites the attribute’s provenance. • satyrn type : asks how an ambiguous col-umn should be used in analysis. For exam-ple, “Should Age be treated as a numeric mea-sure, allowing average age across students of a class, or as a category for grouping students by age?” The answer changes the column’s analytic role but leaves its storage type un-changed. • table role : asks how a structurally ambiguous table should be represented. Whether it should be an entity, a junction table, a passthrough lookup, or a technical table to ignore. The user’s answer replaces the initial classifica-tion and is preserved throughout the remain-ing stages of the pipeline. 

E Prompts 

All LLM calls in T YTAN use schema-contrained outputs. The released code includes the full sys-tem prompts used in our experiments. Their main instructions are summarized below: • Entity proposal : given the table and column names, sampled values, and the user’s one-sentence description when one is provided, propose between two and six entities at the row level, together with their attributes. Entity names should be singular, and abbreviations should be expanded. The model is not allowed to add example values to descriptions; these are appended later from the database. • Entity and attribute mapping : Identify the table that corresponds to each proposed en-tity and the columns that correspond to its attributes. If an attribute cannot be mapped with enough confidence, it is omitted rather than guessed. • Table classification : Classify each remain-ing table as an entity, link table, passthrough lookup, or technical table to ignore. The prompt favors passthrough over ignore so that useful lookup data is not discarded. Determin-istic checks may still reject a classification when the table’s structure or lack of a valid identifier does not support it. • Join verification : Given the names, types, and sample values of two columns, along with the dataset description, decide whether their value overlap reflects a real relationship. Can-didates below the confidence threshold are re-jected. • Naming and refinement : Generate short names for attributes reached through joins and revise generic labels using the values found in the column. Name collisions trig-ger another model call, with a deterministic fallback if the conflict remains unresolved. • Reference suggestion : Propose a short label template for each entity using no more than two placeholders, with name-like attributes preferred.